TPO21  
 
Geothermal Energy 
 
    Earth’s internal heat, fueled by radioactivity, provides the energy for plate tectonics and continental drift, mountain building, and earthquakes. It can also be harnessed to drive electric generators and heat homes. Geothermal energy becomes available in a practical form when underground heat is transferred by water that is heated as it passes through a subsurface region of hot rocks (a heat reservoir) that may be hundreds or thousands of feet deep. ? The water is usually naturally occurring groundwater that seeps down along fractures in the rock; less typically, the water is artificially introduced by being pumped down from the surface. ? The water is brought to the surface, as a liquid or steam, through holes drilled for the purpose. ? 
 
    By far the most abundant form of geothermal energy occurs at the relatively low temperatures of 80 ? to 180 ? centigrade. ?Water circulated through heat reservoirs in this temperature range is able to extract enough heat to warm residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. More than 20,000 apartments in France are now heated by warm underground water drawn from a heat reservoir in a geologic structure near Paris called the Paris Basin. Iceland sits on a volcanic structure known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Reykjavik, the capital of Iceland, is entirely heated by geothermal energy derived from volcanic heat. 
 
    Geothermal reservoirs with temperatures above 180? centigrade are useful for generating electricity. They occur primarily in regions of recent volcanic activity as hot, dry rock; natural hot water; or natural steam. The latter two sources are limited to those few areas where surface water seeps down through underground faults or fractures to reach deep rocks heated by the recent activity of molten rock material. The world’s largest supply of natural steam occurs at The Geysers, 120 kilometers north of San Francisco, California. In the 1990s enough electricity to meet about half the needs of San Francisco was being generated there. This facility was then in its third decade of production and was beginning to show signs of decline, perhaps because of over development. By the late 1990s some 70 geothermal electric-generating plants were in operation in California, Utah, Nevada, and Hawaii, generating enough power to supply about a million people. Eighteen countries now generate electricity using geothermal heat. 
 
    Extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks presents a more difficult problem: the rocks must be fractured to permit the circulation of water, and the water must be provided artificially. The rocks are fractured by water pumped down at very high pressures. Experiments are under way to develop technologies for exploiting this resource. 
 
    Like most other energy sources, geothermal energy presents some environmental problems. The surface of the ground can sink if hot groundwater is withdrawn without being replaced. In addition, water heated geothermally can contain salts can toxic materials dissolved from the hot rock. These waters present a disposal problem if they are not returned to the ground from which they were removed. 
 
    The contribution of geothermal energy to the world’s energy future is difficult to estimate. Geothermal energy is in a sense not renewable, because in most cases the heat would be drawn out of a reservoir much more rapidly than it would be replaced by the very slow geological processes by which heat flows through solid rock into a heat reservoir. However, in many places (for example, California, Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, the rift valleys of Africa) the resource is potentially so large that its future will depend on the economics of production. At present, we can make efficient use of only naturally occurring hot water or steam deposits. Although the potential is enormous, it is likely that in the near future geothermal energy can make important local contributions only where the resource is close to the user and the economics are favorable, as they are in California, New Zealand, and Iceland. Geothermal energy probably will not make large-scale contributions to the world energy budget until well into the twenty-first century, if ever. 
 
1.	According to the processes described in paragraph 1, what is the relationship between radioactivity and the steam produced by geothermal heat? 
A)	Geotheramlly heated steam is produced when water is exposed to radioactivity deep underground. 
B)	When water is introduced into holes drilled thousands of feet in the ground, it becomes radioactive and turns to steam. 
C)	Radioactivity heats Earth’s interior rock, which in turn can heat water to the point it becomes steam. 
D)	When a reservoir of steam in subsurface rock is produced by radioactivity, it is said to be geothermally heated. 
 
2.	The word “practical” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	usable 
B)	plentiful 
C)	economical 
D)	familiar 
 
3.	The word “abundant” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	economical 
B)	familiar 
C)	plentiful 
D)	useful 
 
4.	According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about heat reservoirs with a temperature in the range of 80? to 180? centigrade? 
A) They are under international control. 
B)	They are more common than reservoirs that have a higher temperature. 
C)	Few of them produce enough heat to warm large industrial spaces. 
D)	They are used to generate electricity. 
 
5.	According to paragraph 3, what is the connection between underground faults and naturally occurring steam? 
A)	Underground faults enable the heat from molten-rock material to escape upward to regions where it can heat surface water enough to produce steam. 
B)	Underground faults are created by steam that is produced in geothermal reservoirs deep inside Earth. 
C)	Underground faults create spaces in which natural steam is sometimes trapped. 
D)	Underground faults allow surface water to reach deep rocks that are hot enough to turn it into steam. 
 
6.	In paragraph 3, why does the author mention that in the 1990s, The Geysers was in its third decade of production? 
A)	To provide the historical context of the geothermal production of electricity in the United States 
B)	To imply that The Geysers was the first geothermal site to be put into production in California 
C)	To help explain the signs of decline shown by The Geysers 
D)	To explain why 70 new geothermal sites were put into electricity production in the late 1990s 
 
7.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 and 3 about geothermal reservoirs? 
A)	Volcanic heat is associated only with geothermal reservoirs that have a temperature over 180? centigrade. 
B)	More countries produce power from geothermal reservoirs than use them for heating buildings. 
C)	More geothermal reservoirs are suitable for producing electricity. 
D)	A higher geothermal reservoir temperature is needed to generate electricity than is needed to heat home. 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks is difficult in part because 
A)	the underground rock must be fractured before heat can be removed from it 
B)	the water above the rock is under very high pressure 
C)	the rock breaks apart when water is pumped into it 
D)	the water circulated through the rock must be much cooler than the rock itself 
 
9.	The word “exploiting” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	locating 
B)	increasing 
C)	making use of 
D)	estimating the size of 
 
10.	How is the problem that the surface may “sink” related to the problem that water heated geothermally may contain “toxic materials”? 
A)	Both problems could be solved by returning groundwater that is removed from an underground heat reservoir back to the reservoir after heat is extracted from it. 
B)	The problem of sinking is more difficult to solve than is the problem of toxic materials. 
C)	Land at the surface sinks because the rock beneath the surface is weakened when salts and toxic materials are removed from it in the process of extracting geothermal energy. 
D)	Both problems are caused by the fact that the hot groundwater in a heat reservoir dissolves the rock, which weakens the rock and makes the water toxic with salt. 
 
11.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Heat flows through solid rock very slowly, so it takes a very long time for geological processes to produce a reservoir of geothermal energy. 
B)	Geothermal energy is not renewable because heat flows very slowly through solid rock into or out of a heat reservoir. 
C)	The heat quickly removed from a heat reservoir is replaced so slowly by geological processes that geothermal energy is no, practically speaking, renewable. 
D)	In most cases, heat travels into a heat reservoir so slowly that it is a much quicker process to remove the heat from a reservoir than to replace it. 
 
12.	In paragraph 6, the author implies that in California, Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, and the rift valleys of Africa the potential size of the geothermal resource is so large that 
A)	it might be economically worth developing these sites even though geothermal energy is not renewable 
B)	these sites will be the first geothermal energy sites to be developed with new technology 
C)	these sties are likely the make a large-scale contribution to the world energy budge in the twenty-first century 
D)	it does not matter whether they have naturally occurring deposits of hot water or steam 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
In either case, the heated water will usually be under considerable pressure, and so may have a temperature that is well above its sea-level boiling point of 100? centigrade. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
 
Heat reservoirs in the form of hot rock far beneath Earth’s surface are a potential source of usable geothermal energy. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Heat reservoirs with a temperature from 80? to 180? centigrade can be used, as in France and Iceland, to heat buildings. 
B)	A number of countries now use geothermal reservoirs that contain water or steam about 180? centigrade to generate electricity. 
C)	Most heat reservoirs with a temperature about 180? centigrade cannot be used for energy because they are usually too close to recent volcanic activity. 
D)	The sinking of land above heat reservoirs and other environmental problems arise when water is pumped into a heat reservoir under high pressure. 
E)	Experiments are under way to determine if geothermally heated waters could 
be used as a source of certain minerals that have been dissolved out of hot rocks deep within Earth. 
F)	A number of issues, including how to extract heat from reservoirs that do not have a natural supply of water, will significantly limit the use of geothermal energy for the foreseeable future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. C  2. A  3. C  4. B  5. D  6. C  7. D  8. A  9. C  10. A 
 
         11. C  12. A  13. B  14. A, B, F 
 
 
The Origins of Agriculture 
 
    How did it come about that farming developed independently in a number of world centers (the Southeast Asian mainland, Southwest Asia, Central America, lowland and high land South America, and equatorial Africa) at more or less the same time? Agriculture developed slowly among populations that had an extensive knowledge of plants and animals. ? Changing from hunting and gathering to agriculture had no immediate advantages. ? To start with, it forced the population to abandon the nomad’s life and become sedentary, to develop methods of storage and, often, systems of irrigation. ? While hunter-gatherers always had the option of moving elsewhere when the recourses were exhausted, this became more difficult with farming. ? Furthermore, as the archaeological record shows, the state of health of agriculturalists was worse than that of their contemporary hunger-gatherer. 
 
    Traditionally, it was believed that the transition to agriculture was the result of a worldwide population crisis. It was argued that once hunter-gatherers had occupied the whole world, the population started to grow everywhere and food became scarce; agriculture would have been a solution to this problem. We know, however, that contemporary hunter-gatherer societies control their population in a variety of ways. The idea of a world population crisis is therefore unlikely, although population pressure might have arisen in some areas. 
 
    Climatic changes at the end of the glacial period 13,000 years ago have been proposed to account for the emergence of farming. The temperature increased dramatically in a short period of time (years rather than centuries) allowing for a growth of the hunting-gathering population due to the abundance of resources. There were, however, fluctuations in the climatic conditions, with the consequences that wet conditions were followed by dry ones, so that the availability of plants and animals oscillated brusquely. 
 
    It would appear that the instability of the climatic conditions led populations that had originally been nomadic to settle down and develop a sedentary style of life, which led in turn to population growth and to the need to increase the amount of food available. Farming originated in these conditions. Later on, it became very difficult to change because of the significant expansion of these populations. It could be argued, however, that these conditions are not sufficient to explain the origins of agriculture. Earth had experienced previous periods of climatic change, and yet agriculture had not been developed. 
 
    It is archaeologist Steven Mithen’s thesis brilliantly developed in his book The Prehistory of the Mind (1996), that approximately 40,000 years ago the human mind developed cognitive fluidity, that is, the integration of the specializations of the mind: technical, natural history (geared to understanding the behavior and distribution of natural resources), social intelligence, and the linguistic capacity. Cognitive fluidity explains the appearance of art, religion, and sophisticated speech. Once humans possessed such a mind, they were able to find an imaginative solution to a situation of severe economic crisis such as the farming dilemma described earlier. Mithen proposes the existence of four mental elements to account for the emergence of farming: (1) the ability to develop tools that could be used intensively to harvest and process plant resources; (2) the tendency to use plants and animals as the medium to acquire social prestige and power; (3) the tendency to develop “social relationships” with animals structurally similar to those developed with people – specifically, the ability to think of animals as people (anthropomorphism) and of people as animals (totemism), and (4) the tendency to manipulate plants and animals. 
 
    The fact that some societies domesticated animals and plants, discovered the use of metal tools, became literate, and developed a state should not make us forget that others developed pastoralism or horticulture (vegetable gardening) but remained illiterate and at low levels of productivity, a few entered the modern period as hunting and gathering societies. It is anthropologically important to inquire into the conditions that made some societies adopt agriculture while others remained hunter-gatherers or horticulturalists. However, it should be kept in mind that many societies that knew of agriculture more or less consciously avoided it. Whether Mithen’s explanation is satisfactory is open to contention, and some authors have recently emphasized the importance of other factors. 
 
1.	The word “option” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	choice 
B) benefit 
C)	idea 
D)	experience 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, all of the following are advantages of hunting and gathering over agriculture EXCEPT”
A) It is a healthier lifestyle. 
B)	It requires less knowledge of plants and animals. 
C)	It does not need storage capabilities. 
D)	It is not tied to any specific location. 
 
3.	The word “therefore” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) in theory 
B) obviously 
C) frequently 
D) as a result 
 
4.	Which of the following best describes the way paragraph 2 is organized? 
A)	A possible explanation for a phenomenon is presented and then criticized. 
B)	Two similar ways of accounting for a puzzling fact are considered. 
C)	Early societies’ response to a problem is contrasted with contemporary societies’ response. 
D)	A prehistoric development is first explained in traditional terms and then in contemporary terms. 
 
5.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	The resources needed by the growing hunting and gathering population increased rapidly once temperature rose. 
B)	Dramatic temperature increases and the simultaneous growth of the hunting and gathering population led to the need for more resources. 
C)	Higher temperatures led to the existence of increased resources, thus enabling the hunting and gathering population to grow. 
D)	The dramatic temperature increase occurred during the few years when abundant resources allowed the hunting and gathering population to grow. 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, the abundance of resources fluctuated sharply after the end of the glacial period because 
A)	locally abundant resources were quickly exhausted by hunter-gatherers 
B)	the temperature became much higher in some areas over others 
C)	different types of plants and animals became available as the climate changed D) the amount of rainfall varied radically from one period to the next 
 
7.	It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that it was difficult for people to change from farming back to hunting and gathering because 
A)	people had become more used to different types of food 
B)	climatic conditions were no longer favorable for hunting and gathering 
C)	populations had become too large to be supported by hunting and gathering 
D)	the farmer’s sedentary life was easier than the hunter-gatherer’s nomadic life 
 
8.	Why does the author state that “Earth had experienced previous periods of climatic change, and yet agriculture had not been developed.”? 
A)	To suggest that climate change had occurring long before the development of agriculture 
B)	To argue that climate change does not properly explain why agriculture developed 
C)	To challenge the assumption that agriculture developed only in some parts of the world 
D)	To question the claim that climate change occurred at the time when agriculture developed 
 
9.	The word “imaginative” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	complex 
B)	creative 
C)	immediate 
D)	reliable 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, Steven Mithen believes that all of the following contributed to the emergence of farming EXCEPT 
A)	the development of a mind flexible enough to come up with solutions to complex problems 
B)	the tendency to use plants and animals to acquire power 
C)	the tendency to emphasize the differences between animals and plants 
D)	the ability to make tools that could be used for the large-scale harvesting of plants 
 
11.	The word “contention” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	investigation 
B)	improvement 
C)	debate 
D)	interpretation 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, which of the following is a weakness of Mithen’s explanation? 
A)	It does not clearly distinguish agriculture from poasotrlism and horticulture. 
B)	It fails to explain why some societies adopted agriculture while others did not. 
C)	It explains the domestication of plants and animals but not the development of metal tools. 
D)	It overlooks the fact that literacy and low productivity remain problems even today. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
Because humans had built up this knowledge as hunter-gatherers, it is logical to conclude that over time they would have become extremely efficient. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit 
 
14.	An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
 
It is unclear why hunter-gatherers in different parts of the world independently developed agriculture at roughly the same time. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	One obstacle to the transition form a nomadic lifestyle to the sedentary lifestyle required by agriculture was that hunter-gatherers had not developed storage techniques. 
B)	It seems unlikely that agriculture emerged in response to a food shortage brought on by a worldwide population crisis that developed once the whole world was occupied. 
C)	The origins of agriculture may be linked to climate change at the end of the last ice age, but this does not explain why earlier climatic instability had not led to agriculture. 
D)	The only available means of understanding the social organization and technical abilities of ancient hunter-gatherer societies is the study of contemporary hunter-gatherers. 
E)	One recent theory suggests that the invention of agriculture was made possible by the integration of various mental capabilities in the human mind. 
F)	Little is known about why only some societies that adopted agriculture rapidly progressed to using metal tools, becoming literate, and developing a state. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. A  2. B  3. D  4. A  5. C  6. D  7. C  8. B  9. B  10. C 
 
         11. C  12. B  13. A  14. B, C, E 
 
 
Autobiographical Memory 
 
    Think back to your childhood and try to identify your earliest memory. How old were you? ? Most people are not able to recount memories for experiences prior to the age of three years, a phenomenon called infantile amnesia. ?The question of why infantile amnesia occurs has intrigued psychologists for decades, especially in light of ample evidence that infants and young children can display impressive memory capabilities. ? Many find that understanding the general nature of autobiographical memory, that is, memory for events that have occurred in one’s own life, can provide some important clues to this mystery. ? Between ages three and four, children begin to give fairly lengthy and cohesive descriptions of events in their past. What factors are responsible for this developmental turning point? 
 
    Perhaps the explanation goes back to some ideas raised by influential Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget – namely, that children under age two years represent events in a qualitatively different form than older children do. According to this line of thought, the verbal abilities that blossom in the two year old allow events to be coded in a form radically different from the action-based codes of the infant. Verbal abilities of one year olds are, in fact, related to their memories for events one year later. When researchers had one year olds imitate an action sequence one year after they first saw it, there was correlation between the children’s verbal skills at the time they first saw the event and their success on the later memory task. However, even children with low verbal skills showed evidence of remembering the event, thus, memories may be facilitated by but are not dependent on those verbal skills. 
 
    Another suggestion is that before children can talk about past events in their lives, they need to have reasonable understanding of the self as a psychological entity. The development of an understanding of the self becomes evident between the first and second years of life and shows rapid elaboration in subsequent years. The realization that the physical self has continuity in time, according to this hypothesis, lays the foundation for the emergence of autobiographical memory. 
 
    A third possibility is that children will not be able to tell their own “life story” until they understand something about the general form stones take, that is, the structure of narrative. Knowledge about narratives arises from social interaction, particularly the storytelling that children experience from parents and the attempts parents make to talk with children about past events in their lives. When parents talk with children about “what we did today” or “last week” or “last year” they guide the children’s formation of a framework for talking about the past. They also provide children with reminders about the memory and relay the message that memories are valued as part of the cultural experience. It is interesting to note that some studies show Caucasian American children have earlier childhood memories than Korean children do. Furthermore, other studies show that Caucasian American mother-child pairs talk about past events three times more often than do Korean mother-child pairs. Thus, the types of social experiences children have do factor into the development of autobiographical memories. 
 
    A final suggestion is that children must begin to develop a “theory of mind” – an awareness of the concept of mental states (feelings, desires, beliefs, and thoughts), their own and those of others – before they can talk about their own past memories. Once children become capable of answering such questions as “What does it mean to remember?” and “What does it mean to know something?” improvements in memory seem to occur. 
 
    It may be that the developments just described are intertwined with and influence one another. Talking with parents about the past may enhance the development of the self-concept, for example, as well as help child understand what it means to “remember.” No doubt the ability to talk about one’s past represents memory of a different level of complexity than simple recognition or recall. 
 
1.	The word “ample” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	surprising 
B)	convincing 
C)	plentiful 
D)	questionable 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, infantile amnesia has intrigued psychologists because 
A)	the ability to recount memories prior to three years of age seems to be connected to intelligence in adulthood 
B)	psychologists do not understand why some people are able to recount memories from before the age of three years, while others are not able to do so 
C)	psychologists do not understand the connection between infantile amnesia and autobiographical memory 
D)	although psychologists have evidence that infants have memory abilities, most people cannot remember life events that happened before the age of three years 
 
3.	According to paragraph 1, what is the evidence that a child has developed autographical memory? 
A)	The child is able to remember past events from before the age of three years. 
B)	The child is able to describe past events in a sufficiently lengthy and cohesive manner. 
C)	The child is aware that he or she does not remember experiences from before the age of three years. 
D)	The child is able to give a basic description of the nature of autobiographical memory. 
 
4.	In paragraph 2, why does the author provide the information that children with low verbal skills showed evidence of remembering a past event? 
A)	To provide evidence that memories do not depend only upon verbal skills 
B)	To challenge the idea that one year olds are too young to form memories 
C)	To argue that the memory of one year olds depends only on action-based codes 
D)	To suggest that Piaget later revised his findings on the correlation between memory and verbal ability 
 
5.	The word “reasonable” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	consistent 
B)	sufficient 
C)	apparent 
D)	deep 
 
6.	The word “elaboration” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	development 
B)	specialization 
C)	use 
D)	transformation 
 
7.	According to paragraph 3, what is the relationship between autobiographical memory and the development of an understanding of the self? 
A)	Autobiographical memory aids the development of an understanding of the self. 
B)	Children possess an understanding of the self when they can talk about past events in their lives. 
C)	The realization that the self continues through time may aid in the onset of autobiographical memory. 
D)	The development of autobiographical memory helps children gain an understanding of their roles in their social relationships. 
 
8.	All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 4 as ways in which parents help their children understand the structure of narratives EXCEPT 
A)	talking with their children about past events 
B)	telling stories to their children 
C)	having their children repeat stories back to them 
D)	showing their children that they think memories are important 
 
9.	According to paragraph 4, the studies of Caucasian American and Korean children suggest which of the following? 
A)	Autobiographical memories develop similarly across all cultures. 
B)	Parents form different cultures tell their children different kinds of stories about the past. 
C)	Children’s pleasure in hearing stories varies from culture to culture. 
D)	The kinds of interactions children have with their parents affect the development of autobiographical memories. 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, what evidence is there that a “theory of mind” is a factor in the development of autobiographical memory? 
A)	Even children who are not aware of their mental states are still able to talk about past events. 
B)	Autobiographical memory decreases when a child’s feelings and mental state 
are upset. 
C)	Older children who are unable to achieve awareness of mental states lack autobiographical memory. 
D)	Children’s memory of past events grows once children can answer questions about what it means to know and remember. 
 
11.	The organization of the passage can best be described as 
A)	the presentation of an argument followed by the evidence for and against it 
B)	a description of a phenomenon followed by several possible theories about how it develops 
C)	the definition of a psychological term followed by a history of its usage 
D)	an explanation of a process followed by a discussion of its practical applications 
 
12.	The passage supports which of the following statements about the development of autobiographical memory? 
A)	It is unlikely that a single factor is responsible for the development of autobiographical memory. 
B)	Jean Piaget was the first psychologist to understand the development of autobiographical memory. 
C)	Understanding the development of autobiographical memory will help psychologists eliminate infant amnesia. 
D)	Understanding what it means to remember is the most important factor in the development of autobiographical memory. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
It is unlikely that this memory will be from the first two years of life. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	An introductory sentence for a brief summary of the passage is provided below. Complete the summary by selecting the THREE answer choices that express the most important ideas in the passage. Some answer choices do not belong in the summary because they express ideas that are not presented in the passage or are minor ideas in the passage. 
 
The ability to construct autobiographical memories – coherent narratives about events from one’s past – is probably the joint product of several social and intellectual developments. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Although children are capable of simple recognition and recall very early in life, they do not develop the capacity for autobiographical memory until the age of three or four years. 
B)	Verbal skills and familiarity with narrative structures probably aid in the construction of autobiographical memories. 
C)	Children’s earliest autobiographical memories are usually about social interactions with parents. 
D)	Research suggests that infantile amnesia occurs in some cultures but not in others and may be linked to children’s social experiences. 
E)	The development of autobiographical memory allows children to appreciate the fact that memories are an important part of their culture experience. 
F)	Children who have acquired a concept of the self and of various mental states are generally able to talk about their own past memories. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. C  2. D  3. B  4. A  5. B  6. A  7. C  8. C  9. D  10. D 
 
         11. B  12. A  13. A  14. A, B, F 
 
 
 
TPO22 
 
Spartine 
 
Spartine alterniflora, known as cordgrass, is a deciduous, perennial flowering plant native to the Atlantic coast and the Gulf Coast of the United States. It is the dominant native species of the lower salt marshes along these coasts, where it grows in the intertidal zone (the area covered by water some parts of the day and exposed others.) 
 
    These natural salt marshes are among the most productive habitats in the marine environment. Nutrient-rich water is brought to the wetlands during each high tide, making a high rate of food production possible. As the seaweed and marsh grass leaves die, bacteria break down the plant material, and insects, small shrimplike organisms, fiddler crabs, and marsh snails eat the decaying plant tissue, digest it, and excrete wastes high in nutrients. Numerous insects occupy the marsh, feeding on living or dead cordgrass tissue, and redwing blackbirds, sparrows, rodents, rabbits, and deer feed directly on the cordgrass. Each tidal cycle carries plant materials into the offshore water to be used by the subtidal organisms. 
 
    Spartina is an exceedingly competitive plant. ? It spreads primarily by underground stems; colonies form when pieces of the root system or whole plants float into an area and take root or when seeds float into a suitable area and germinate. ?Spartina establishes itself on substrates ranging from sand and silt to gravel and cobble and is tolerant of salinities ranging from that of near freshwater (0.05 percent) to that of salt water (3.5 percent). ? Because they lack oxygen, marsh sediments are high in sulfides that are toxic to most plants. ? Spartina has the ability to take up sulfides and convert them to sulfate, a form of sulfur that the plant can use; this ability makes it easier for the grass to colonize marsh environments. Another adaptive advantage is Spartina’s ability to use carbon dioxide more efficiently than most other plants. 
 
    These characteristics make Spartina a valuable component of the estuaries where it occurs naturally. The plant functions as a stabilizer and a sediment trap and as a nursery area for estuarine fish and shellfish. Once established, a stand of Spartina begins to trap sediment, changing the substrate elevation, and eventually the stand evolves into a high marsh system where Spartina is gradually displaced by higher-elevation, brackish-water species. As elevation increases, narrow, deep channels of water form throughout the marsh. Along the east coast Spartina is considered valuable for its ability to prevent erosion and marshland deterioration; it is also used to coastal restoration projects and the creation of new wetland sites. 
 
    Spartina was transported to Washington State in packing materials for oysters transplanted from the east coast in 1894. Leaving its insect predators behind, the cordgrass has been spreading slowly and steadily along Washington’s tidal estuaries on the west coast, crowding out the native plants and drastically altering the landscape by trapping sediment. Spartina modifies tidal mudflats, turning them into high marshes inhospitable to the many fish and waterfowl that depend on the mudflats. It is already hampering the oyster harvest and the Dungeness crab fishery, and it interferes with the recreational use of beaches and waterfronts. Spartina has been transplanted to England and to New Zealand for land reclamation and shoreline stabilization. In New Zealand the plant has spread rapidly, changing mudflats with marshy fringes to extensive salt meadows and reducing the number and kinds of birds and animals that use the marsh. 
 
    Efforts to control Spartina outside its natural environment have included burning, flooding, shading plants with black canvas or plastic, smothering the plants with dredged materials or clay, applying herbicide, and mowing repeated. Little success has been reported in New Zealand and England; Washington State’s management program has tried many of these methods and is presently using the herbicide glyphosphate to control its spread. Work has begun to determine the feasibility of using insects as biological controls, but effective biological controls are considered years away. Even with a massive effort, it is doubtful that complete eradication of Spartina from nonnative habitats is possible, for it has become an integral part of these shorelines and estuaries during the last 100 to 200 years. 
 
1.	According to paragraph 1, each of the following is true of Spartina alternifolra 
EXCEPT: 
A)	It rarely flowers in salt marshes. 
B)	It grows well in intertidal zones. 
C)	It is commonly referred to as cordgrass. 
D)	It occurs naturally along the Gulf Coast and the Atlantic cost of the United States. 
 
2.	According to paragraph 2, a major reason why natural salt marshes are so productive is that they are 
A)	inhabited by long-lived seaweed and marsh grasses that reproduce gradually 
B)	kept clear of excess plant material by the tides 
C)	regularly supplied with high levels of nutrients 
D)	home to a wide variety of different species of grasses 
 
3.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Insects feed only on dead cordgrass, while most other marsh inhabitants feed on live cordgrass. 
B)	The marsh is a good habitat for insects, but a relatively poor one for birds and animals. 
C)	Although cordgrass provides food for birds and animals, it gives insects both food and a place to live. 
D)	Cordgrass provides food for numerous insects, birds, and other animals. 
 
4.	What is the organizational structure of paragraph 3? 
A)	It makes a general claim about Spartina and then provides specific evidence to defend that claim against objections to the claim. 
B)	It presents a general characterization of Spartina and then describes particular features on which this characterization is based. 
C)	It reports a widely held view about Spartina and then considers evidence both for and against that view. 
D)	It presents a general hypothesis about Spartina and then lists specific evidence that disputes that hypothesis. 
 
5.	The word “exceedingly” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	unusually 
B)	dangerously 
C)	surprisingly 
D)	highly 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, one reason that Spartina is able to compete in marsh environments so successfully is its ability to 
A) alter the substrate in which it grows 
B)	convert sulfides into a usable form of sulfur 
C)	grow and produce seeds while floating on the surface of the water 
D)	produce carbon dioxide with great efficiency 
 
7.	Paragraph 4 suggests that where Spartina occurs naturally, an established stand of it will eventually 
A)	create conditions in which it can no longer survive 
B)	get washed away by water flowing through the deep channels that form around it 
C)	become adapted to brackish water 
D)	take over other grass species growing in the area 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, in its natural habitats, Spartina helps estuaries by  
A)	controlling marshland decline 
B)	decreasing the substrate elevation 
C)	reducing the brackishness of the water 
D)	increasing the flow of water into the estuary 
 
9.	The word “modifies” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	creates 
B)	changes 
C)	grows on 
D)	breaks down 
 
10.	The word “Efforts” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) Laws 
B) Suggestions 
C)	Attempts 
D)	Failures 
 
11.	According to paragraph 5, Spartina negatively affects wildlife in estuaries by  
A) trapping fish and waterfowl in sediment B) preventing oysters from transplanting successfully 
C)	turning mudflats into high marshes and salt meadows 
D)	expanding the marshy fringes of salt meadows 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, each of the following methods has been used in attempts to control Spartina EXCEPT: 
A)	flooding plants 
B)	cutting plants down repeatedly 
C)	applying herbicides 
D)	introducing predatory insects 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
Spartina is particularly able to tolerate high salinities because salt glands on the surface of the leaves remove the salt from the plant sap. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Spartina alterniflora, or cordgrass, is the dominant native species in salt marshes along the Atlantic coast and the Gulf Coast of the United States. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Spartina is very well adapted to conditions in salt marshes, where it plays a valuable role in stabilizing them and making them highly productive marine habitats. 
B)	Spartina expands by growing root systems that float on the water’s surface and descend underground, where it finds the nutrients it needs to germinate. 
C)	As a result of its spread in Washington State over the past hundreds years, 
Spartina has now become a threat to native oysters by releasing sediments that 
contain sulfides into the waters. 
D)	The dead leaves of Spartina become food for a wide variety of marine organisms. 
E)	Outside its native regions, Spartina can pose serious problems by turning mudflats into high marshes that are inhospitable to many native fish and birds. 
F)	Spartina has physiological adaptations that allow it to grow in environments where other plants cannot, making it a very strong competitor that is difficult to control once it is established. 
 
  
The Birth of Photography 
 
    Perceptions of the visible world were greatly altered by the invention of photography in the middle of the nineteenth century. In particular, and quite logically, the art of painting was forever changed, though not always in the ways one might have expected. The realistic and naturalistic painters of the mid- and late-nineteenth century were all intently aware of photography – as a thing to use, to learn from, and react to. 
 
    Unlike most major inventions, photography had been long and impatiently awaited. The images produced by the camera obscura, a boxlike device that used a pinhole or lens to throw and image onto a ground-glass screen or a piece of white paper, were already familiar – the device had been much employed by topographical artists like the Italian painter Canaletto in his detailed views of the city of Venice. What was lacking was a way of giving such images permanent form. This was finally achieved by Louis Daguerre (1787 – 1851), who perfected a way of fixing them on a silvered copper plate. His discovery, the “daguerreotype,” was announced in 1839. ? 
 
    A second and very different process was patented by the British inventor William Henry Talbot (1800 – 1877) in 1841. ? Talbot’s “calotype” was the first negative-to-positive process and the direct ancestor of the modern photograph. The calotype was revolutionary in its use of chemically treated paper in which areas hit by light became dark in tone, producing a negative image. ? This “negative”, as Talbot called it, could then be used to print multiple positive images on another piece of treated paper. ? 
 
    The two processes produced very different results. The daguerreotype was a unique image that reproduced what was in front of the camera lens in minute, unselective detail and could not be duplicated. The calotype could be made in series, and was thus the equivalent of an etching or an engraving. Its general effect was soft edged and tonal. 
 
    One of the things that most impressed the original audience for photography was the idea of authenticity. Nature now seemed able to speak for itself, with a minimum of interference. The title Talbot chose for his book, The pencil of Nature (the first part of which was published in 1844), reflected this feeling. Artists were fascinated by photography because it offered a way of examining the world in much greater detail. They were also afraid of it, because it seemed likely to make their own efforts unnecessary. 
 
    Photograph did indeed make certain kinds of painting obsolete – the daguerreotype virtually did away with the portrait miniature. It also made the whole business of making and owning images democratic. Portraiture, once a luxury for the privileged few, was suddenly well within the reach of many more people. 
 
    In the long term, photography’s impact on the visual arts was far from simple. Because the medium was so prolific, in the sense that it was possible to produce a multitude of images very cheaply, it was soon treated as the poor relation of the fine art, rather than its destined successor. Even those artists who were most dependent on photography became reluctant to admit that they made use of it, in case this compromised their professional standing. 
 
    The rapid technical development of photography – the introduction of lighter and simpler equipment, and of new emulsions that coated photographic plates, film, and paper and enabled images to be made at much faster speeds – had some unanticipated consequences. Scientific experiments made by photographers such as Eadweard Muybridge (1830 – 1904) and Etienne-Jules Marey (1830 – 1904) demonstrated that the movements of both humans and animals differed widely from the way they had been traditionally represented in art. Artists, often reluctantly, were forced to accept the evidence provided by the camera. The new candid photography – unposed pictures that were made when the subjects were unaware that their pictures were being taken – confirmed these scientific results, and at the same time, thanks to the radical cropping (trimming) of images that the camera often imposed, suggested new compositional formats. The accidental effects obtained by candid photographers were soon being copied by artists such as the French painter Degas. 
 
1.	What can be inferred from paragraph 1 and 2 about the effect of photography on nineteenth-century painting? 
A)	Photography did not significantly change the way people looked at reality. 
B)	Most painters used the images of the camera obscura in preference to those of the daguerreotype. 
C)	Painters who were concerned with realistic or naturalistic representation were particularly influenced by photography. 
D)	Artists used the long-awaited invention of photography in just the ways they had expected to. 
 
2.	The word “duplicated” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) copied 
B) replaced 
C)	handled 
D)	clarified 
 
3.	The phrase “Its general effect” in the passage refers to 
A)	the camera lens 
B)	the calotype 
C)	the etching 
D)	the engraving 
 
4.	According the paragraphs 2 and 3, which of the following did the daguerreotype and the calotype have in common? 
A)	They were equally useful for artists. 
B)	They could be reproduced. 
C)	They produced a permanent image. 
D)	They were produced on treated paper. 
 
5.	The word “authenticity” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	improvement 
B)	practicality 
C) genuineness 
D) repetition 
 
6.	What point does the author make in paragraph 6? 
A)	Paintings became less expensive because of competition with photograph. 
B)	Photography, unlike painting, was a type of portraiture that even ordinary people could afford. 
C)	Every style of painting was influenced by the invention of photography. 
D)	The daguerreotype was more popular than the calotype. 
 
7.	The word “reluctant” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	unable 
B)	embarrassed 
C)	unlikely 
D)	unwilling 
 
8.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Photography did not replace other fine arts because people felt the image looked cheap in relation to the other arts. 
B)	Photography was not considered a true art because people could use it to create many images cheaply. 
C)	Photography was so cheap and readily available that it could be purchased by people who were too poor to purchase fine art. 
D)	Photography not only spread quickly but also was a cheap art form and so became the successor of fine arts rather than its poor relation. 
 
9.	The word “accidental” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	surprising 
B)	unintentional 
C)	realistic 
D)	unusual 
 
10.	The word “unanticipated” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	indirect 
B)	not expected 
C)	unquestionable 
D)	beneficial 
 
11.	Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 8 as a benefit that artists derived from photography? 
A)	It inspired artists to use technological themes in their painting. 
B)	It lent prestige to those artists who used photographs as models for paintings. 
C)	It provided artists with new types of equipment to speed up the painting process. 
D)	It motivated artists to think about new ways to compose images in their paintings. 
 
12.	It can be inferred from paragraph 8 that one effect that photography had on painting was that it 
A)	provided painters with new insights into how humans and animals actually move 
B)	showed that representing movement could be as interesting as portrait art 
C)	increased the appeal of painted portraiture among the wealthy 
D)	influenced artists to improve techniques for painting faster 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
Although his process produced permanent images, each was unique and no reproduction of the picture was possible. 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
The invention of photography had a significant impact on the art of painting in the nineteenth century. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	For a brief time, artists preferred not to paint natural or realistic images that would have to compete with photographs. 
B)	Before photography, Canaletto had used the camera obscura to project scenes onto a paper or glass plate. 
C)	The photographic processes of Louis Daguerre and William Henry Talbot both made permanent images, but only Talbot’s process allowed making multiple copies. 
D)	The work of Eadweard Muybridge and Etienne-Jules Marey established photography both as a science and as an art. 
E)	Photography made accurate images widely and inexpensively available, but this popular success also had the effect of lowering its perceived value in relation to the fine arts. 
F)	Photography eliminated the painted portrait miniature, led artists to accurately represent movement, and affected pictorial composition, but did not replace traditional visual arts.  
The Allende Meteorite 
 
    Sometime after midnight on February 8, 1969, a large, bright meteor entered Earth’s atmosphere and broke into thousands of pieces, plummeted to the ground, and scattered over an area 50 miles long and 10 miles wide in the state of Chihuahua in Mexico. The first meteorite from this fall was found in the village of Pueblito de Allende. Altogether, roughly two tons of meteorite fragments were recovered, all of which bear the name Allende for the location of the first discovery. 
 
    Individual specimens of Allende are covered with a black, glassy crust that formed when their exteriors melted as they were slowed by Earth’s atmosphere. When broken open, Allende stones are revealed to contain an assortment of small, distinctive objects, spherical or irregular in shape and embedded in a dark gray matrix (binding material), which were once constituents of the solar nebula – the interstellar cloud of gas and dust out of which our solar system was formed. 
 
    The Allende meteorite is classified as a chondrite. Chondrites take their name tfrom the Greek word chondros – meaning “seed” – an allusion to their appearance as rocks containing tiny seeds. These seeds are actually chondrules: millimeter-sized melted droplets of silicate material that were cooled into spheres of glass and crystal. A few chondrules contain grains that survived the melting event, so these enigmatic chondrules must have formed when compact masses of nebular dust were fused at high temperatures – approaching 1,700 degrees Celsius – and then cooled before these surviving grains could melt. Study of the textures of chondrules confirms that they cooled rather quickly, in times measure in minutes or hours, so the heating events that formed them must have been localized. It seems very unlikely that large portions of the nebula were heated to such extreme temperatures, and huge nebula areas could not possibly have lost heat so fast. Chondrules must have been melted in small pockets of the nebula that were able to lose heat rapidly. The origin of these peculiar glassy spheres remains an enigma. 
 
    Equally perplexing constituents of Allende are the refractory inclusions: irregular white masses that tend to be larger than chondrules. ? They are composed of minerals uncommon on Earth, all rich in calcium, aluminum, the most refractory (resistant to melting) of the major elements in the nebula. ? The same minerals that occur in refractory inclusions are believed to be the earliest-formed substances to have condensed out of the solar nebula. ? However, studies of the textures of inclusions reveal that the order in which the minerals appeared in the inclusions varies from inclusion to inclusion, and often does not match the theoretical condensation sequence for those metals. ? 
 
     Chondrules and inclusions in Allende are held together by the chondrite matrix, a mixture of fine-grained, mostly silicate minerals that also includes grains of iron metal and iron sulfide. At one time it was thought that these matrix grains might be pristine nebular dust, the sort of stuff from which chondrules and inclusions were made. However, detailed studies of the chondrite matrix suggest that much of it, too, has been formed by condensation or melting in the nebula, although minute amounts of surviving interstellar dust are mixed with the processed materials. 
 
     All these diverse constituents are aggregated together to form chondritic meteorites, like Allende, that have chemical compositions much like that of the Sun. To compare the compositions of a meteorite and the Sun, it is necessary that we use ratios of elements rather than simply the abundances of atoms. After all, the Sun has many more atoms of any element, say iron, than does a meteorite specimen, but the ratios of iron to silicon in the two kinds of matter might be comparable. The compositional similarity is striking. The major difference is that Allende is depleted in the most volatile elements, like hydrogen carbon, oxygen nitrogen, and the noble gases, relative to the Sun. These are the elements that tend to form gases even at very low temperatures. We might think of chondrites as samples of distilled Sun, a sort of solar sludge from which only gases have been removed. Since practically all the solar system’s mass resides in the Sun, this similarity in chemistry means that chondrites have average solar system composition, except for the most volatile elements; they are truly lumps of nebular matter, probably similar in composition to the matter from which planets were assembled. 
 
1.	The word “location” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	sight 
B)	sake 
C)	success 
D)	place 
 
2.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about the large meteor that entered Earth’s atmosphere on February 8, 1969?
A) It was almost ten miles wide. 
B)	It was the biggest meteor ever to hit Mexico. 
C)	It weighted more than two tons. 
D)	It broke into more pieces than most meteors do. 
 
3.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Allende meteorites were formed when constituents of the interstellar cloud of gas and dust got trapped inside small, roughly spherical objects and these objects became bound together in a dark gray matrix. 
B)	Inside Allende meteorites is a dark gray matrix that binds together small, spherical or irregular objects formed from the interstellar could of gas and dust out of which the solar system was made. 
C)	By breaking open Allende meteorites, scientists were able to find out what the solar nebular was made of. 
D)	Allende meteorites were filled with material formed almost entirely from interstellar gas and dust. 
 
4.	The word “allusion” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	addition 
B)	modification 
C)	resemblance 
D)	reference 
 
5.	The word “enigmatic” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	dangerous 
B)	mysterious 
C)	interesting 
D)	surprising 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, what does the presence of grains inside some of the chondrules indicate? 
A)	The chondrules were formed of silicate material. 
B)	The chondrules were formed at high temperatures and then cooled rapidly. 
C)	The grains were formed in huge areas of the solar nebula. 
D)	The grains were formed after the chondrules were fused together into chondrites. 
 
7.	According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true about the minerals found in the refractory inclusions EXCEPT: 
A)	These minerals are among the most resistant to melting of all the major elements in the solar nebula. 
B)	These minerals are believed to be some of the first elements to have condensed out of the solar nebula. 
C)	These minerals are among the least commonly found elements on Earth. 
D)	These elements occur in the order that scientists would have predicted. 
 
8.	The word “pristine” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	pure 
B)	solid 
C)	ordinary 
D)	trapped 
 
9.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following is indicated by studies of the mixture holding the inclusions together? 
A)	Large amounts of this material were formed by condensation or melting in the nebula. 
B)	This material contains more iron and iron sulfide than had previously been thought. 
C)	This material is very similar to the material from which the refractory inclusions are made. 
D)	The grains in this material are made from the same elements as chondrules are. 
 
10.	In paragraph 6, why does the author mention that “the Sun has many more atoms of any element, say iron, than does a meteorite specimen”? 
A)	To show how difficult it is to compare the composition of a meteorite with that of the Sun 
B)	To explain why a comparison of the compositions of a meteorite and of the Sun has to be done in terms of ratios of elements 
C)	To identify the most common element in both the Sun and meteorite specimen 
D)	To emphasize how much larger the Sun is than any meteorite specimen is 
 
11.	According to paragraph 6, the composition of chondritic meteorites differs from the composition of the Sun primarily in A) containing nebular matter 
B)	containing many fewer atoms of iron 
C)	the relative amount of volatile elements 
D)	the ratio of iron to silicon 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, what is the significance of the similarity in composition between chondrites and the Sun? 
A)	It indicates what the matter from which planets were formed was probably like. 
B)	It may explain how the Sun originally developed. 
C)	It helps scientists estimate the variations in the chemical composition of different meteors. 
D)	It suggests that most meteorites may contain large quantities of volatile elements. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
It is therefore still unclear if all inclusions were formed in the same way. 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Studies of the Allende meteorite provided information about the composition of chondritic meteorites and their possible origin. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	When Allende entered Earth’s atmosphere, it broke into thousands of pieces called chordrites because they look like glassy, black seeds. 
B)	The mineral content of chondrules suggests that they were probably formed in isolated regions of the nebula that remained much hotter than the rest. 
C)	Chondrules are tiny, millimeter-sized drops of silicate materials that probably formed when lumps of nebular dust were fused at extremely high temperatures and then quickly cooled. 
D)	Irregularly shaped inclusions in Allende are composed of minerals that are resistant to melting and are believed to be the earliest minerals to have condensed out of the nebula. 
E)	The matrix that holds the chondrules and inclusions together in Allende consists mainly of grains of nebular dust that were trapped inside the meteor before they could be melted. 
F)	Except for being depleted in volatile elements, chondritic meteorites are probably very similar in composition to the matter from which planets were assembled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TPO23 
Urban Climates 
 
    The city is an extraordinary processor of mass and energy and has its own metabolism. A daily input of water, food, and energy of various kinds is matched by an output of sewage, solid waste, air pollutants, energy, and materials that have been transformed in some way. The quantities involved are enormous. Many aspects of this energy use affect the atmosphere of a city, particularly in the production of heat. 
 
    In winter the heat produced by a city can equal or surpass the amount of heat available from the Sun. All the heat that warms a building eventually transfers to the surrounding air, a process that is quickest where houses are poorly insulated. But an automobile produces enough heat to warm an average house in winter, and if a house were perfectly insulated, one adult could also produce more than enough heat to warm it. Therefore, even without any industrial production of heat, an urban area tends to be warmer than the countryside that surrounds it. 
 
    The burning of fuel, such as by cars, is not the only source of this increased heat. Two other factors contribute to the higher overall temperature in cities. The first is the heat capacity of the materials that constitute the city, which is typically dominated by concrete and asphalt. During the day, heat from the Sun can be conducted into these materials and stored – to be released at night. But in the countryside materials have a significantly lower heat capacity because a vegetative blanket prevents heat from easily flowing into and out of the ground. The second factor is that radiant heat coming into the city from the Sun is trapped in two ways: (1) by a continuing series of reflections among the numerous vertical surfaces that buildings present and (2) by the dust dome the cloudlike layer of polluted air that most cities produce. Shortwave radiation from the Sun passes through the pollution dome more easily than outgoing longwave radiation does; the latter is absorbed by the gaseous pollutants of the dome and reradiated back to the urban surface. 
 
    Cities, then, are warmer than the surrounding rural areas, and together they produce a phenomenon known as the urban heat island. Heat islands develop best under particular conditions associated with light winds, but they can form almost any time. ? The precise configuration of a heat island depends on several factors. ? For example, the wind can make a heat island stretch in the direction it blows. ? When a heat island is well developed, variations can be extreme; in winter, busy streets in cities can be 17? warmer than the side streets. ? Areas near traffic lights can be similarly warmer than the areas between them because of the effect of cars standing in traffic instead of moving. The maximum differences in temperature between neighboring urban and rural environments is called the heat-island intensity for that region. In general, the larger the city, the greater its heat-island intensity. The actual level of intensity depends on such factors as the physical layout, population density, and productive activities of a metropolis. 
 
    The surface-atmosphere relationships inside metropolitan areas produce a number of climatic peculiarities. For one thing, the presence or absence of moisture is affected by the special qualities of the urban surface. With much of the built-up landscape impenetrable by water, even gentle rain runs off almost immediately from rooftops, streets, and parking lots. Thus, city surfaces, as well as the air above them, tend to be drier between episodes of rain; with little water available for the cooling process of evaporation, relative humidities are usually lower. Wind movements are also modified in cities because buildings increase the friction on air flowing around them. This friction tends to slow the speed of winds, making them far less efficient at dispersing pollutants. On the other hand, air turbulence increases because of the effect of skyscrapers on airflow. Rainfall is also increased in cities. The cause appears to be in part greater turbulence in the urban atmosphere as hot air rises from the built-up surface. 
 
1.	The word “enormous” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	growing 
B)	frightening 
C)	very large 
D)	strictly controlled 
 
2.	The word “surpass” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	remain below 
B)	be higher than 
C)	add to 
D)	come close to 
 
3.	According to paragraph 2, how soon heat from a warmed house reaches the outside air is greatly affect by 
A)	how well the house is heated 
B)	how well the house is insulated 
C)	how many adults live in the house 
D)	how much sunshine the house receives 
 
4.	According to paragraph 3, each of the following contributes to making urban areas warmer than the surrounding countryside EXCEPT 
A)	the fuel burned by motor vehicles 
B)	the capacity to store heat of the materials used in building a city 
C) the easy flow of heat into the ground in city areas covered by vegetation 
D) the repeated reflection of solar radiation back and forth among buildings 
 
5.	According to paragraph 3, why do materials in the countryside have a lower heat capacity than materials in cities do? 
A)	In the countryside the Sun is the only important source of heat. 
B)	Construction materials in the city are not as good at keeping buildings warm as they are in the countryside. 
C)	In the countryside the solar heat that flows into the ground flows out again quickly. 
D)	Countryside vegetation prevents heat from being trapped in the ground. 
 
6.	How is paragraph 3 organized? 
A)	It describes two factors that contribute to the increased heat of cities and then provides two causes for the second factor. 
B)	It describes two causes discovered in an early analysis of the increased heat of cities. 
C)	It describes two factors that contribute to the increased heat of cities and two other factors that work against it. 
D)	It describes two well-established causes of the increased heat of cities and another two whose roles are less well understood. 
 
7.	The word “configuration” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	location 
B)	history 
C)	temperature 
D)	shape 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, what can explain the substantial differences in temperature between one area and another within a well-developed heat island? 
A) The overall size of the heat island that includes the two areas. 
B)	The intensity of the heat island that includes the two areas. 
C)	Differences between the two areas in the general level of activity, including traffic. 
D)	Differences between the two areas in the insulation materials used in construction. 
 
9.	Paragraph 4 supports the idea that a city’s heat-island intensity would increase if 
A)	the city went into an economic decline and lost population 
B)	the city’s economy shifted from heavy industry to health care and education 
C)	there was an upward trend in the average age of the city’s residents D) repair work on the streets slowed traffic throughout the city 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, surfaces in the city are generally drier than surfaces in the countryside between periods of rainfall because 
A)	in the city gentle rain is much more common than heavy rain 
B)	high temperatures in the city speed up the process of evaporation 
C)	in the city there are longer periods of dry weather between episodes of rain 
D) rainwater in the city cannot soak into most surfaces and quickly runs off 
 
11.	The word “modified” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	changed 
B)	blocked 
C) increased 
D) weakened 
 
12.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following is a factor responsible for the greater air turbulence in urban environments? 
A)	The high speed of the winds traveling above cities 
B)	The greater rainfall totals recorded in cities 
C)	Attempts to reduce urban air pollution 
D)	The effects of tall buildings on airflow 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
   Another possibility is for the heat island to be stretched along the course of major rivers, since large waterways typically have a warming effect on the air directly above them. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Cities create climatic conditions of their own through their physical structure and urban activities. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The amount of heat produced in a city will be reduced when cities use the heat from cars to warm homes. 
B)	The built-up landscape of the city readily becomes a heat island, with greater water runoff and special climatic conditions such as low relative humidity and increased air turbulence. 
C)	The materials from which cities are built and the effects of pollution domes help make urban areas warmer than rural areas. 
D)	Cities tend to be warmer than their surrounding areas, in part because they produce heat by burning fuel for heating, powering vehicles, and industrial production. 
E)	In most cities, the heating that results from solar radiation is intensified by carbon dioxide, a gas that is present at very high concentrations in cities’ atmosphere. 
F)	During periods without rainfall, the air in cities heats up and causes winds to slow down with the result that pollutants are not dispersed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seventeenth-Century Dutch Agriculture 
 
    Agriculture and fishing formed the primary sector of the economy in the Netherlands in the seventeenth century. Dutch agriculture was modernized and commercialized new crops and agricultural techniques raised levels of production so that they were in line with market demands, and cheap grain was imported annually from the Baltic region in large quantities. According to estimates, about 120,000 tons of imported grain fed about 600,000 people; that is about a third of the Dutch population. Importing the grain, which would have been expensive and time consuming for the Dutch to have produced themselves, kept the price of grain low and thus stimulated individual demand for other foodstuffs and consumer goods. 
 
    Apart from this, being able to give up labor-intensive grain production freed both the land and the workforce for more productive agricultural divisions. The peasants specialized in livestock husbandry and dairy farming as well as in cultivating industrial crops and fodder crops: flax, madder, and rape were grown, as were tobacco, hops, and turnips. These products were bought mostly by urban businesses. There was also a demand among urban consumers for dairy products such as butter and cheese, which, in the sixteenth century, had become more expensive than grain. The high prices encouraged the peasants to improve their animal husbandry techniques; for example, they began feeding their animals indoors in order to raise the milk yield of their cows. 
 
    In addition to dairy farming and cultivating industrial crops, a third sector of the Dutch economy reflected the way in which agriculture was being modernized – horticulture. ? In the sixteenth century, fruit and vegetables were to be found only in gardens belonging to wealthy people. ? This changed in the early part of the seventeenth century when horticulture became accepted as an agricultural sector. ?Whole villages began to cultivate fruit and vegetables. ? The produce was then transported by water to markets in the cities, where the consumption of fruit and vegetable was no longer restricted to the wealthy. 
 
    As the demand for agricultural produce from both consumers and industry increased, agricultural land became more valuable and people tried to work the available land more intensively and to reclaim more land from wetlands and lakes. In order to increase production on existing land, the peasants made more use of crop rotation and, in particular, began to apply animal waste to the soil regularly, rather than leaving the fertilization process up to the grazing livestock. For the first time, industrial waste, such as ash from the soap-boilers, was collected in the cities and sold in the country as artificial fertilizer. The increased yield and price of land justified reclaiming and draining even more land. 
 
    The Dutch battle against the sea is legendary. Noorderkwaroer in Holland, with its numerous lakes and stretches of water, was particularly suitable for land reclamation and one of the biggest projects undertaken there was the draining of the Beemster lake which began in 1608. The richest merchants in Amsterdam contributed money to reclaim a good 7,100 hectares of land. Forty-three windmills powered the drainage pumps so that they were able to lease the reclamation to farmers as early as 1612, with the investors receiving annual leasing payments at an interest rate of 17 percent. Land reclamation continued, and between 1590 and 1665 almost 100,000 hectares were reclaimed from the wetland areas of Holland, Zeeland, and Friesland. However, land reclamation decreased significantly after the middle of the seventeenth century because the price of agricultural products began to fall, making land reclamation far less profitable in the second part of the century. 
 
    Dutch agriculture was finally affected by the general agricultural crisis in Europe during the last two decades of the seventeenth century. However, what is astonishing about this is not that Dutch agriculture was affected by critical phenomena such as a decrease in sales and production, but the fact that the crisis appeared only relatively late in Dutch agriculture. In Europe as a whole, the exceptional reduction in the population and the related fall in demand for grain since the beginning of the seventeenth century had caused the price of agricultural products to fall. Dutch peasants were able to remain unaffected by this crisis for a long time because they had specialized in dairy farming, industrial crops, and horticulture. However, toward the end of the seventeenth century, they too were overtaken by the general agriculture crisis. 
 
1.	By indicating that production was in line with market demands, the author means that Dutch farmers were able to 
A)	exceed other European countries in agricultural production 
B)	produce crops that were similar to those popular in other European countries 
C)	supply sufficient quantities of the agricultural products that the Dutch population wanted to buy 
D)	satisfy the demand for high quality agricultural products from the Baltic region 
 
2.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Buying imported grain led to the Dutch demanding that other foodstuffs and consumer goods be imported. 
B)	Because the Dutch were able to import inexpensive grain, they had money available to create a demand for other food products and consumer goods. 
C)	Keeping the price of grain low was a primary goal of the Dutch at a time when they could not produce enough grain to provide for all their needs. 
D)	The demand for other foodstuffs and consumer goods forced the Dutch to import grain and other products at a time when maintaining low prices was especially important. 
 
3.	The phrase “Apart from” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	Besides 
B)	Despite 
C)	As a result of 
D)	Instead of 
 
4.	According to paragraph 2, the increased demands on Dutch agriculture made by urban consumers had which of the following results? 
A)	Seasonal shortages of the products consumers most wanted 
B)	Increased production of high-quality grain products C) Raised prices charged by peasants to urban consumers 
D) Different ways of caring for dairy-producing animals 
 
5.	The word “consumption” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	sale 
B)	storage 
C)	exportation 
D)	utilization 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, the modernization of agriculture in the Netherlands was evident in all of the following ways EXCEPT: 
A)	The production of fruits and vegetables became a commercial venture. 
B)	The wealthy stopped growing fruits and vegetables in their gardens and frew flowers instead. 
C)	Horticultural produce was transported to city markets by water. 
D)	Many more people were able to afford to eat fresh fruits and vegetables. 
 
7.	Select TWO answer choices that, according to paragraph 4, indicate two methods people used to increase the productivity of their land. To receive credit you must select TWO answers. 
A)	They planted different crops in different sections of the farm each year. 
B)	They used improved irrigation methods to increase the yield of crops. 
C)	They increased the use of fertilizers to supply more nutrients to plants. 
D)	They used new horticultural practices to produce different varieties of plants in the same section of the farm. 
 
8.	The word “they” in the passage refers to 
A)	merchants 
B)	hectares 
C)	windmills 
D)	drainage pumps 
 
9.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following was an important reason why land-reclamation projects in the first half of the seventeenth century proceeded rapidly? 
A)	Windmills became powerful enough to run drainage pumps efficiently. 
B)	Merchants invested large amounts of money in reclamation. 
C)	High interest rates discouraged people from buying land already available. 
D)	Reclaimed land was much more suitable for agriculture than the existing land. 
 
10.	The word “legendary” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	continuous 
B)	well documented 
C)	famous 
D)	expensive 
 
11.	The word “astonishing” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	incredible 
B)	unfortunate 
C)	predicted 
D)	evident 
 
12.	Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage? 
A)	A presentation of a theory and the evidence in favor of it 
B)	A general statement followed by examples and relevant details 
C)	A series of statements leading to a conclusion 
D)	An analysis of a problem and its solution 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
   Some villages specialized in growing cabbages and carrots; others grew onions, mustard, and coriander; and still others produced fruit and cultivated trees in nurseries. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Agriculture formed one of the primary sectors of the economy in seventeenth-century Netherlands. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The Baltic region produced large quantities of grain for export to other regions, including the Netherlands. 
B)	The richest people grew enough fruits and vegetables to supply the entire country with fresh produce. 
C)	An agricultural crisis that began in Europe did not affect Dutch land-reclamation projects. 
D)	Specialization in dairy farming, industrial crops, and horticulture allowed the Dutch to be more productive than some other regions in Europe. 
E)	Land reclamation and improvement allowed the Dutch to meet demands for their agricultural products 
F)	Because the Dutch had specialized their agricultural output, they were less susceptible to the crisis that Europe experienced from the beginning of the century. 
 
 
 
Rock Art of the Australian Aborigines 
 
    Ever since Europeans first explored Australia, people have been trying to understand the ancient rock drawings and carvings created by the Aborigines, the original inhabitants of the continent. Early in the nineteenth century, encounters with Aboriginal rock art tended to be infrequent and open to speculative interpretation, but since the late nineteenth century, awareness of the extent and variety of Australian rock art has been growing. In the latter decades of the twentieth century there were intensified efforts to understand and record the abundance of Australia rock art. 
 
    The systematic study of this art is a relatively new discipline in Australia. Over the past four decades new discoveries have steadily added to the body of knowledge. The most significant data have come from a concentration of three major questions. First, what is the age of Australian rock art? Second, what is its stylistic organization and is it possible to discern a sequence or a pattern of development between styles? 
Third, is it possible to interpret accurately the subject matter of ancient rock art, bringing to bear all available archaeological techniques and the knowledge of present-day Aboriginal informants? ? 
 
    The age of Australia’s rock art is constantly being revised, and earlier datings have been proposed as the result of new discoveries. ? Currently, reliable scientific evidence dates the earliest creation of art on rock surfaces in Australia to somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago. ? This in itself is an almost incomprehensible span of generations, and one that makes Australia’s rock art the oldest continuous art tradition in the world. ? 
 
    Although the remarkable antiquity of Australia’s rock art is now established, the sequences and meanings of its images have been widely debated. Since the mid-1970s a reasonably stable picture has formed of the organization of Australian rock art. In order to create a sense of structure to this picture, researchers have relied on a distinction that still underlies the forms of much indigenous visual culture – a distinction between geometric and figurative elements. Simple geometric repeated patterns – circles, concentric circles, and lines – constitute the iconography (characteristic images) of the earliest rock-art sites found across Australia. The frequency with which certain simple motifs appear in these oldest sites has led rock-art researchers to adopt a descriptive term – the Panaramitee style – a label which takes its name from the extensive rock pavements at Panaramitee North in desert South Australia, which are covered with motifs pecked into the surfaces. Certain features of these engravings lead to the conclusion that they are of great age – geological changes had clearly happened after the designs had been made and local Aboriginal informants, when first questioned about them, seemed to know nothing of their origins. Furthermore, the designs were covered with “desert varnish,” a glaze that develops on rock surfaces over thousands of years of exposure to the elements. The simple motifs found at Panaramitee are common to many rock-art sites across Australia. Indeed, sites with engravings of geometric shapes are also to be found on the island of Tasmania, which was separated from the mainland of the continent some 10,000 years ago. 
 
    In the 1970s, when the study of Australian archaeology was in an exciting phase of development, with the great antiquity of rock art becoming clear. Lesley Maynard, the archaeologist who coined the phrase “Panaramitee style,” suggested that a sequence could be determined for Australian rock art in which a geometric style gave way to a simple figurative style (outlines of figures and animals), followed by a range of complex figurative styles that, unlike the pan-Australian geometric tradition tended to much greater regional diversity. While accepting that this sequence fits the archaeological profile of those sites, which were occupied continuously over many thousands of years, a number of writers have warned that the underlying assumption of such a sequence – a development form the simple and the geometric to the complex and naturalistic – obscures the cultural continuities in Aboriginal Australia in which geometric symbolism remains fundamentally important. In this context the simplicity of a geometric motif may be more apparent than real. Motifs of seeming simplicity can encode complex meanings in Aboriginal Australia. And has not twentieth-century art shown that naturalism does not necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of predetermined sequence? 
 
1.	The word “infrequent” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	puzzling 
B)	uncommon 
C)	questionable 
D)	undocumented 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, the twentieth-century approach to studying Australian rock art was different from earlier approaches because the twentieth-century approach 
A)	recognized that many different groups of Aborigines created Australian rock art 
B)	concentrated on a limited range of Aboriginal rock art 
C)	examined Aboriginal art from an Aboriginal rather than from a European perspective 
D)	focused more intensely on understanding and documenting rock art 
 
3.	The word “relatively” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	completely 
B)	comparatively 
C)	apparently 
D)	particularly 
 
4.	The word “discern” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	indicate 
B)	apply 
C)	identify 
D)	repeat 
 
5.	The word “revised” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	discussed 
B)	raised 
C)	challenged 
D)	changed 
 
6.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	The oldest rock art sites have simpler motifs than the best known sites of Panaramitee North. 
B)	Because motifs primarily associated with the Panaramitee region are common in the oldest sites, the term Panaramitee style has become the general term for rock art of this type. 
C)	Because the Panaramitee style is so common in the older sites, researchers have described it most extensively. 
D)	The motifs carved in the rocky surface of the Panaramitee region make up the oldest form of rock art discovered in Australia. 
 
7.	According to paragraph4, researchers have organized and structured Australian rock art by distinguishing between which of the following? 
A)	images found at Panaramitee North and images found in other parts of Australia 
B)	images found in a particular type of rock layer and images found in other types of rock layers 
C)	images that have geometric elements and images that have figurative elements 
D)	images that are typically found and images that are rarely found 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, all of the following are signs of the great age of the 
Panaramitee engravings EXCEPT 
A)	The engravings consisted of simple animal drawings. 
B)	The engravings were covered with a layer of a substance known as “desert varnish.” 
C)	Local Aborigines who were asked knew nothing about the origin of the engravings. 
D)	Geologic changes had occurred after the engravings were made. 
 
9.	Why does the author include information about Tasmania in paragraph 4? 
A)	To provide evidence that the Panaramitee style is widespread and of great age 
B)	To prove that Aboriginal Australians could not have made the carvings in Tasmania 
C)	To indicate how researchers have determined how long ago Tasmania separated from the mainland 
D)	To illustrate the importance of geometric rock art to tourism in Tasmania 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, the complex figurative style differs from the geometric style in that the complex figurative style 
A)	varies significantly from region to region 
B)	is more meaningful 
C)	appears on only a few types of rocks 
D)	has changed little over time 
2.	According to paragraph 5, Lesley Maynard made which of the following suggestions about Australian rock art? 
A)	There was a pattern of human figures being represented in a more complex style than animal figures. 
B)	Australian archaeology should concentrate on determining the sequence of styles that led up to the Panaramitee style. 
C)	The great antiquity of Australian rock art would probably make it impossible to determine the ages of the various styles found in rock art. 
D)	The geometric style of Australian rock art was replaced by increasingly complex figurative styles. 
 
12.	In paragraph 5, the author indicates that twentieth-century art has shown that “naturalism does not necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of predetermined sequence” in order to 
A)	emphasize that it may not be possible to determine what the figures in ancient rock art represent 
B)	suggest a reply to those who have questioned Maynard’s interpretation of the sequence of Australia rock art 
C)	provide a counterexample to Maynard’s interpretation of the sequence of Australian rock art 
D)	indicate that twentieth-century art is more advanced than ancient rock art 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
   While a great deal of information exists, the answers to these questions are not yet definitive. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Interest in the rock art of the original inhabitants of Australia has grown over the last two centuries. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Late nineteenth-century studies of Aboriginal rock art failed to recognize that a variety of styles existed. 
B)	The extreme age of the earliest Aboriginal rock art has been established but the interpretation of rock art images is still debated. 
C)	A sequence from geometric to more representative art fits many sites but does not necessarily indicate a progression from simple to complex meanings. 
D)	In determining the way in which Australian rock art was organized, 
archaeologists have made little distinction between geometric and figurative elements. 
E)	Older examples of rock art consist of simple, repeated geometric patterns while later rock art includes figures and animals. 
F)	Aboriginal informants were able to explain the meanings of ancient rock art symbols. 
 
 
 
TPO24 
 
 
Lake Water 
 
Where does the water in a lake come from, and how does water leave it? Water enters a lake from inflowing rivers, from underwater seeps and springs, from overland flow off the surrounding land, and from rain falling directly on the lake surface. Water leaves a lake via outflowing rivers, by soaking into the bed of the lake, and by evaporation. So much is obvious. 
 
The questions become more complicated when actual volumes of water are considered: how much water enters and leaves by each route? Discovering the inputs and outputs of rivers is a matter of measuring the discharges of every inflowing and outflowing stream and river. Then exchanges with the atmosphere are calculated by finding the difference between the gains from rain, as measured (rather roughly) by rain gauges, and the losses by evaporation, measured with models that correct for the other sources of water loss. From the majority of lakes, certainly those surrounded by forests, input from overland flow is too small to have a noticeable effect. Changes in lake level not explained by river flows plus exchanges with the atmosphere must be due to the net difference between what seeps into the lake from the groundwater and what leaks into the groundwater. Note the word “net”: measuring the actual amounts of groundwater seepage into the lake and out of the lake is a much more complicated matter than merely inferring their difference. 
 
Once all this information has been gathered, it becomes possible to judge whether a lake’s flow is mainly due to its surface inputs and outputs or to its underground inputs and outputs. ? If the former are greater, the lake is a surface-water-dominated lake; if the latter, it is a seepage-dominated lake. ? Occasionally, common sense tells you which of these two possibilities applies. ? For example, a pond in hilly country that maintains a steady water level all through a dry summer in spite of having no streams flowing into it must obviously be seepage dominated. Conversely, a pond with a stream flowing in one end and out the other, which dries up when the stream dries up, is clearly surface water dominated. ? 
By whatever means, a lake is constantly gaining water and losing water: its water does not just sit there, or, anyway, not for long. This raises the matter of a lake’s residence time. The residence time is the average length of time that any particular molecule of water remains in the lake, and it is calculated by dividing the volume of water in the lake by the rate at which water leaves the lake. The residence time is an average; the time spent in the lake by a given molecule (if we could follow its fate) would depend on the route it took: it might flow through as part of the fastest, most direct current, or it might circle in a backwater for an indefinitely long time. 
 
Residence times vary enormously. They range from a few days for small lakes up to several hundred years for large ones; Lake Tahoe, in California, has a residence time of 700 years. The residence times for the Great Lakes of North America, namely, Lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie and Ontario, are, respectively, 190, 100, 22, 
2.5 and 6 years. Lake Erie’s is the lowest: although its area is larger than Lake Ontario’s, its volume is less than one-third as great because it is so shallow – less than 20 meters on average. 
 
A given lake’s residence time is by no means a fixed quantity. It depends on the rate at which water enters the lake, and that depends on the rainfall and the evaporation rate. Climatic change (the result of global warming?) is dramatically affecting the residence times of some lakes in northwestern Ontario, Canada. In the period 1970 to 1986, rainfall in the area decreased from 1,000 millimeters to 650 millimeters per annum, while above-average temperatures speeded up the evapotranspiration rate (the rate at which water is lost to the atmosphere through evaporation and the processes of plant life). The result has been that the residence time of one of the lakes increased from 5 to 18 years during the study period. The slowing down of water renewal leads to a chain of further consequences: it causes dissolved chemicals to become increasingly concentrated, and this, in turn, has a marked effect on all living things in the lake. 
 
1.	The phrase “So much” in the passage refers to 
A)	the negative effects of overland flow, rain, and evaporation on river water levels 
B)	water that a lake loses to outflowing rivers, to the lake bed, and to evaporation 
C)	the importance of rivers to the maintenance of lake water levels 
D)	the information given about ways that water can enter or exit a lake 
 
2.	The word “gains” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	results B) increases 
C)	resources 
D)	savings 
3.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the movement of water into a lake? 
A)	Heavy rain accounts for most of the water that enters into lakes. 
B)	Rainfall replaces approximately the amount of water lost through evaporation. 
C)	Overland flow into lakes is reduced by the presence of forests. 
D)	Seepage has a smaller effect on water level than any other input. 
 
4.	Why does the author use the phrase “Note the word “net”” in the passage? 
A)	To emphasize the impact of seepage on water levels 
B)	To point out that seepage is calculated differently from river flows and atmospheric exchanges 
C)	To compare the different methods of calculating seepage 
D)	To emphasize the difficulty of obtaining specific values for seepage inputs and outputs 
 
5.	The word “Conversely” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	on the other hand 
B)	in the same way 
C)	in other words 
D)	on average 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, which of the following best describes a seepage-dominated lake? 
A)	A lake that is fed by streams but still has fluctuating water levels 
B)	A lake with a constant water level that has no streams or rivers as inputs 
C)	A lake with a stream flowing into it and a stream flowing out of it 
D)	A lake that has surface and underground inputs but loses water during dry seasons 
 
7.	It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the length of time a given molecule of water remains in a lake 
A)	depends entirely upon the average speed of a lake’s currents 
B)	can be measured by the volume of the lake alone 
C)	can be greater or lesser than the residence time 
D)	is similar to the length of time all other molecules remain in that lake 
 
8.	According to paragraph 5, Lake Erie’s residence time is lower than Lake Ontario’s for which of the following reason? 
A)	Lake Erie has a larger area than Lake Ontario. 
B)	Lake Ontario is shallower than Lake Erie. 
C)	Lake Ontario has a greater volume than Lake Erie. 
D)	Lake Erie receives less rainfall than Lake Ontario. 
2.	Why does the author discuss the Great Lakes in paragraph 5? 
A)	To demonstrate the extent to which residence times vary form lake to lake 
B)	To illustrate how residence times are calculated for specific lakes 
C)	To argue that the residence time of a lake increases with area 
D)	To emphasize that Lake Tahoe’s residence time is unusually long 
 
10.	The word “further” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	expected 
B)	additional 
C)	serious 
D)	unfortunate 
 
11.	According to paragraph 6, which of the following explains the increase in residence time of some lakes of northwestern Ontario? 
A)	The amo0unt of water flowing into the lakes has increased. 
B)	The rate of evaporation has decreased more sharply than the amount of rainfall. 
C)	The renewal of the lakes’ water has slowed due to changes in climate. 
D)	Plants have required less water from the lakes. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, residence time is affected by all of the following 
EXCEPT 
A)	amount of rainfall 
B)	rate of evaporation 
C)	temperature of surrounding air 
D)	concentration of chemicals in lake water 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
   Of course, a lake may be neither surface-water- nor seepage-dominated if, for example, its inputs are predominantly surface and its outputs are predominantly seepage. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Water enters, remains, and eventually leaves a lake in a variety of ways. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	By measuring the water quantities at each of a lake’s inputs and outputs, it can be determined whether water enters the lake mainly from surface or 
groundwater sources. 
B)	Changes in lake level and volume are caused principally by the amount of evaporation of water into the atmosphere. 
C)	It is sometimes possible to decide whether a lake is surface water dominated or seepage dominated by simple observation at different seasons. 
D)	The average period of time that molecules of water spend in a lake – the residence time – varies from lake to lake and over time within a particular lake. 
E)	The residence times of surface-water-dominated lakes are usually longer than those of seepage-dominated lakes. 
F)	The residence time of a lake frequently depends on the kinds of organisms to be found in the lake. 
 
 
 
Moving into Pueblos 
 
In the Mesa Verde area of the ancient North American Southwest, living patterns changed in the thirteenth century, with large numbers of people moving into large communal dwellings called pueblos, often constructed at the edges of canyons, especially on the sides of cliffs. Abandoning small extended-family households to move into these large pueblos with dozens if not hundreds of other people was probably traumatic. Few of the cultural traditions and rules that today allow us to deal with dense populations existed for these people accustomed to household autonomy and the ability to move around the landscape almost at will. ? And besides the awkwardness of having to share walls with neighbors, living in aggregated pueblos introduced other problems. ? For people in cliff dwellings, hauling water, wood, and food to their homes was a major chore. ? The stress on local resources, especially in the firewood needed for daily cooking and warmth, was particularly intense, and conditions in aggregated pueblos were not very hygienic. ? 
 
Given all the disadvantages of living in aggregated towns, why did people in the thirteenth century move into these closely packed quarters? For transitions of such suddenness, archaeologists consider either pull factors (benefits that drew families together) or push factors (some external threat or crisis that forced people to aggregate). In this case, push explanations dominate. 
 
Population growth is considered a particularly influential push. After several generations of population growth, people packed the landscape in densities so high that communal pueblos may have been a necessary outcome. Around Sand Canyon, for example, populations grew from 5 – 12 people per square kilometer in the tenth century to as many as 30 – 50 by the 1200s. As densities increased, domestic architecture became larger, culminating in crowded pueblos. Some scholars expand on this idea by emphasizing a corresponding need for arable land to feed growing numbers of people: construction of small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses indicates that farmers were intensifying their efforts during the 1200s. Competition for good farmland may also have prompted people to bond together to assert rights over the best fields. 
 
Another important push was the onset of the Little Ice Age, a climatic phenomenon that led to cooler temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. Although the height of the Little Ice Age was still around the corner, some evidence suggests that temperatures were falling during the thirteenth century. The environmental changes associated with this transition are not fully understood, but people living closest to the San Juan Mountains, to the northeast of Mesa Verde, were affected first. Growing food at these elevations is always difficult because of the short growing season. As the Little Ice Age progressed, farmers probably moved their fields to lower elevations, infringing on the lands of other farmers and pushing people together, thus contributing to the aggregations. Archaeologists identify a corresponding shift in populations toward the south and west toward Mesa Verde and away from higher elevations. 
 
In the face of all these pushes, people in the Mesa Verde area had yet another reason to move into communal villages: the need for greater cooperation. Sharing and cooperation were almost certainly part of early Puebloan life, even for people living in largely independent single-household residences scattered across the landscape. Archaeologists find that even the most isolated residences during the eleventh and twelfth centuries obtained some pottery, and probably food, from some distance away, while major ceremonial events were opportunities for sharing food and crafts. Scholars believe that this cooperation allowed people to contend with a patchy environment in which precipitation and other resources varied across the landscape: if you produce a lot of food one year, you might trade it for pottery made by a distant ally who is having difficulty with crops – and the next year, the flow of goods might go in the opposite direction. But all of this appears to have changed in the thirteenth century. Although the climate remained as unpredictable as ever between one year and the next, it became much less locally diverse. In a bad year for farming, everyone was equally affected. No longer was it helpful to share widely. Instead, the most sensible thing would be for neighbors to combine efforts to produce as much food as possible, and thus aggregated towns were a sensible arrangement. 
 
1.	The word “traumatic” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	essential 
B)	highly stressful 
C)	highly unusual 
D)	unwise 
    
2.	The word “intense” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) strong 
B)	questionable 
C)	obvious 
D)	deliberate 
 
3.	According to paragraph 1, before the thirteenth century the people of southwestern North America lived in households that 
A)	shard daily chores with neighboring households 
B)	occupied dwellings that were built into the sides of cliffs 
C)	were largely free to conduct their lives as they pleased 
D)	enforced common standards of behavior and cooperative conduct within their communities 
 
4.	Which of the following best indicates the organization of paragraph 1? 
A)	It presents the conditions that caused a change in a population’s living patterns and then explains why those conditions got worse. 
B)	It identifies certain present-day cultural traditions and rules and then traces them to their roots in the thirteenth century. 
C)	It casts doubt on one explanation of the move to pueblos and then introduces an alternative explanation that the passage will defend. 
D)	It describes a major change in a population’s living patterns and then presents a number of problems that resulted from that change. 
 
5.	According to paragraph 3, which of the following was one of the consequences of increasing population densities? 
A)	People were increasingly crowded into collections of large housing units. 
B)	People stopped planting crops that have relatively low yields. 
C)	Domestic buildings were pushed beyond the canyon limits. 
D)	The natural landscape was destroyed. 
 
6.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Some scholars even claimed that the intensification of farmers’ various efforts during the 1200s led to further population growth and the consequent need for more arable land. 
B)	Evidence of intensifying agriculture in the 1200s indicates a need to feed a larger population and so extends the argument that a growing population was the cause of the move to pueblos. 
C)	During the 1200s, farmers met the demand for more arable land, but they also succeeded in cultivating existing land more intensively with the help of agricultural construction projects. 
D)	Some scholars feel strongly that the construction of small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses in the thirteenth century is independent evident for growth in the number of people. 
 
7.	The word “transition” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	change 
B)	climate 
C)	decline 
D)	problem 
 
8.	Why does the author state that “Growing food at these elevations is always difficult because of the short growing season”? 
A)	To explain why the higher elevations were always relatively sparsely populated 
B)	To suggest that any worsening of conditions would have significant consequences 
C)	To emphasize how resourceful the people growing food at these elevations were 
D)	To argue that farming was not the primary source of food at high elevations 
 
9.	According to paragraph 4, what did farmers do in response to falling temperatures during the Little Ice Age? 
A)	Moved to areas away from Mesa Verde 
B)	Moved closer to the northeastern part of Mesa Verde 
C)	Began to cultivate crops adapted to a short growing season 
D)	Gave up the cultivation of the highest-lying lands 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, major ceremonial events were occasions for 
A) leaders to persuade people from the countryside to move into a pueblo 
B)	farmers to collect information about where crops could be reliably growth 
C)	people to develop better techniques for producing pottery and crafts 
D) people in the early Puebloan era to share farm and craft products 
 
11.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following was a reason for people in the Mesa Verde area formed communal villages in the thirteenth century? A) The climate in the Mesa Verde area became more locally diverse. 
B)	Individuals were no longer interested in exchanging pottery and food. 
C)	Cooperation between people became more important for survival. 
D)	Bad years of farming began to occur more frequently. 
 
12.	Paragraph 5 supports which of the following statements about cooperation among the people in the Mesa Verde area from the eleventh through the thirteenth century? 
A)	Cooperation allowed many households to give up farming and to specialize in making pottery and crafts. 
B)	People went from exchanging food and crafts they individually produced 
to sharing in a cooperative effort to produce as much food as possible. 
C)	Overtime there was less cooperation as farmers competed with each other for trade with distant areas. 
D)	Individuals stopped cooperating with each other because they did not have enough food for themselves. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
      Performing everyday household tasks required more effrot. 
 
      Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
   
   In the thirteenth century, the people in the Mesa Verde area went from living in scattered independent households to living in large pueblos. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Because the thirteenth-century inhabitants of the Mesa Verde area did not have the cultural expectations of today’s city dwellers, they easily adapted to communal life. 
B)	Even though living in pueblos had disadvantages, the population of the area had grown so large that there may have been no other arrangement that would have met its needs. 
C)	From the eleventh century onward, farmers began to increase food production on existing farmland and started bringing more land under cultivation. 
D)	A development that contributed to increasing population densities was a cooling climate that led many people to leave the coldest areas and crowed into climatically more favorable areas. 
E)	The primary reason for moving to pueblos was the social benefits associate with communal life. 
F)	People were brought together by the need to produce food cooperatively, as the use of food surpluses in one place to relieve shortages in another ended due to a change in climate. 
 
 
 
 
 
Breathing During Sleep 
 
Of all the physiological differences in human sleep compared with wakefulness that have been discovered in the last decade, changes in respiratory control are most dramatic. Not only are there differences in the level of the functioning of respiratory systems, there are even changes in how they function. Movements of the rib cage for breathing are reduced during sleep, making the contractions of the diaphragm more important. ? Yet because of the physics of lying down, the stomach applies weight against the diaphragm and makes it more difficult for the diaphragm to do its job. ? However, there are many other changes that affect respiration when asleep. 
 
?During wakefulness, breathing is controlled by two interacting systems. ?? The first is an automatic, metabolic system whose control is centered in the brain stem. It subconsciously adjusts breathing rate and depth in order to regulate the levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2), and the acid-base ratio in the blood. The second system is the voluntary, behavioral system. Its control center is based in the forebrain, and it regulates breathing for use in speech, singing, signing, and so on. It is capable of ignoring or overriding the automatic, metabolic system and produces an irregular pattern of breathing. 
 
During NREM (the phrase of sleep in which there is no rapid eye movement) breathing becomes deeper and more regular, but there is also a decrease in the breathing rate, resulting in less air being exchanged overall. This occurs because during NREM sleep the automatic, metabolic system has exclusive control over breathing and the body uses less oxygen and produces less carbon dioxide. Also, during sleep the automatic metabolic system is less responsive to carbon dioxide levels and oxygen levels in the blood. Two things result from these changes in breathing control that occur during sleep. First, there may be a brief cessation or reduction of breathing when falling asleep as the sleeper waxes and wanes between sleep and wakefulness and their differing control mechanisms. Second, once sleep is fully obtained, there is an increase of carbon dioxide and a decrease of oxygen in the blood that persists during NREM. 
 
But that is not all that changes. During all phrases of sleep, several changes in the air passages have been observed. It takes twice as much effort to breathe during sleep because of greater resistance to airflow in the airways and changes in the efficiency of the muscles used for breathing. Some of the muscles that help keep the upper airway open when breathing tend to become more relaxed during sleep especially during REM ( the phrase of sleep in which there is rapid eye movement). Without this muscular action, inhaling is like sucking air out of a balloon – the narrow passages tend to collapse. Also there is a regular cycle of change in resistance between the two sides of the nose. If something blocks the “good” side, such as congestion from allergies or a cold, then resistance increases dramatically. Coupled with these factors is the loss of the complex interactions among the muscles that can change the route of airflow from nose to mouth. 
 
Other respiratory regulating mechanisms apparently cease functioning during sleep. For example, during wakefulness there is an immediate, automatic, adaptive increase in breathing effort when inhaling is made more difficult (such as breathing through a restrictive face mask). This reflexive adjustment is totally absent during NREM sleep. Only after several inadequate breaths under such conditions, resulting in the considerable elevation of carbon dioxide and reduction of oxygen in the blood, is breathing effort adjusted. Finally, the coughing reflex in reaction to irritants in the airway produces not a cough during sleep but a cessation of breathing. If the irritation is severe enough, a sleeping person will arouse, clear the airway, then resume breathing and likely return to sleep. 
 
Additional breathing changes occur during REM sleep that even more dramatic than the changes that occur during NREM. The amount of air exchanged is even lower in REM than NREM because, although breathing is more rapid in REM, it is also more irregular, with brief episodes of shallow breathing or absence of breathing. In addition, breathing during REM depends much more on the action of the diaphragm and much less on rib cage action. 
 
1.	According to paragraph 1, which of the following can be inferred about the diaphragm during sleep? 
A)	During sleep the diaphragm requires increased movement of the rib cage. 
B)	The diaphragm helps with breathing as movements of the rib cage decrease during sleep. 
C)	The diaphragm requires a great amount of pressure to function properly. 
D)	The diaphragm contributes to the effective functioning of the rib cage. 
 
2.	According to paragraph 2, all of the following are true of the voluntary breathing system EXCEPT: 
A)	It has its control center in the brain stem. 
B)	It controls breathing for a number of activities during wakefulness. 
C)	It is able to bypass the automatic system. 
D)	It produces an irregular breathing pattern. 
 
3.	The word “exclusive” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	consistent 
B)	perfect 
C)	partial 
D)	sole 
 
4.	According to paragraph 3, which of the following may occur just between NREM sleep begins? 
A)	The automatic, metabolic system may increase its dependence on air exchanges. 
B)	Breathing can stop for a short time as a person falls asleep. 
C)	An increase in the oxygen level in the blood can occur as sleep becomes fully obtained. 
D)	The level of carbon dioxide in the blood may drop suddenly. 
 
5.	What is the author’s purpose in stating that “inhaling is like sucking air out of a balloon”? 
A)	To refute the argument that additional effort is necessary for breathing during sleep 
B)	To argue that REM sleep is more important than NREM sleep 
C)	To illustrate the difficulty of breathing during sleep 
D)	To illustrate how blockage of narrow passages can be prevented during sleep 
 
6.	All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 4 as being characteristic of breathing during sleep EXCEPT 
A)	relaxation of the muscles involved in the respiratory system 
B)	changes in resistance between the two sides of the nose 
C)	easier airflow in the passages of the upper airway 
D)	absence of certain complex muscle interactions 
 
7.	According to paragraph 5, what happens during NREM sleep when inhaling is difficult? 
A)	There is an immediate, automatic, adaptive increase in breathing effort. 
B)	The sleeping person takes several inadequate breaths before the breathing effort is adjusted. 
C)	The coughing reflex causes the breathing effort to adjust. 
D)	The airways become cleared as the blood removes irritants. 
 
8.	It can be inferred from paragraph 5 that a very mild irritation during sleep will likely cause the sleeping person to 
A)	increase the breathing effort 
B)	wake up and remove the source of irritation 
C)	cough while still sleeping 
D)	stop breathing temporarily while still sleeping 
 
9.	The word “considerable” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	significant 
B)	steady 
C)	usual 
D)	necessary 
 
10.	The word “resume” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	reduce 
B)	stop 
C)	readjust 
D)	restart 
 
11.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Because breathing is more shallow and irregular in REM than in NREM, less air is exchanged in REM 
B)	Breathing in NREM is less effective than breathing in REM because of irregular episodes of rapid breathing during NREM. 
C)	Because breathing is more rapid in NREM sleep than in REM sleep, breathing often becomes shallow. 
D)	Although REM has brief episodes of shallow breathing or lack of breathing, breathing is more rapid than in NREM. 
 
12.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence can be added to the passage. 
 
   To better understand breathing during sleep, it is, however, helpful to first understand how respiration works in general. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
From the seven statements below, select the statements that correctly characterize breathing during wakefulness and those statements that correctly characterize breathing during sleep. Drag each answer choice you select into the appropriate box of the table. Two of the answer choices will NOT be used. 
 
Answer choices: 
 
A)	The role of the rib cage increases and the role of the diaphragm decreases. 
B)	Carbon dioxide in blood rises and oxygen drops. 
C)	The coughing reflex is extremely complex. 
D)	A great deal of effort is used for breathing. 
E)	Upper airways are resistant to colds and allergies. 
F)	There is a drop in the volume of air that is exchanged. 
G)	Automatic and voluntary respiratory systems are both involved. 
 
 
Wakefulness 
 
?	
?	
 
Sleep 
 
?	
?	
?	
 
 
TPO25 
 
The Surface of Mars 
 
    The surface of Mars shows a wide range of geologic features, including huge volcanoes – the largest known in the solar system – and extensive impact cratering. Three very large volcanoes are found on the Tharsis bulge, an enormous geologic area near Mars’s equator. Northwest of Tharsis is the largest volcano of all: Olympus Mons, with a height of 25 kilometers and measuring some 700 kilometers in diameter at its base. The three large volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge are a little smaller – a “mere” 18 kilometers high. 
 
    None of these volcanoes was formed as a result of collisions between plates of the Martian crust – there is no plate motion on Mars. Instead, they are shield volcanoes – volcanoes with broad, sloping sides formed by molten rock. All four show distinctive lava channels and other flow features similar to those found on shield volcanoes on Earth. Images of the Martian surface reveal many hundreds of volcanoes. Most of the largest volcanoes are associated with the Tharsis bulge, but many smaller ones are found in the northern plains. 
 
    The great height of Martian volcanoes is a direct consequence of the planet’s low surface gravity. As lava flows and spreads to form a shield volcano, the volcano’s eventual height depends on the new mountain’s ability to support its own weight. The lower the gravity, the lesser the weight and the greater the height of the mountain. It is no accident that Maxwell Mons on Venus and the Hawaiian shield volcanoes on Earth rise to about the same height (about 10 kilometers) above their respective bases – Earth and Venus have similar surface gravity. Mars’s surface gravity is only 40 percent that of Earth, so volcanoes rise roughly 2.5 times as high. Are the Martian shield volcanoes still active? Scientists have no direct evidence for recent or ongoing eruptions, but if these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago (an estimate of the time of last eruption based on the extent of impact cratering on their slopes), some of them may still be at least intermittently active. Millions of years, though, may pass between eruptions. 
 
    Another prominent feature of Mars’s surface is cratering. The Mariner spacecraft found that the surface of Mars, as well as that of its two moons, is pitted with impact craters formed by meteoroids falling in from space. As on our Moon, the smaller craters are often filled with surface matter – mostly dust – confirming that Mars is a dry desert world. However, Martian craters get filled in considerably faster than their lunar counterparts. On the Moon, ancient craters less than 100 meters across (corresponding to depths of about 20 meters) have been obliterated, primarily by meteoritic erosion. On Mars, there are relatively few craters less than about 5 kilometers in diameter. The Martian atmosphere is an efficient erosive agent, with Martian winds transporting dust from place to place and erasing surface features much faster than meteoritic impacts alone can obliterate them. 
 
    As on the Moon, the extent of large impact cratering (i.e., craters too big to have been filled in by erosion since they were formed) serves as an age indicator for the Martian surface. Age estimates ranging from four billion years for Mars’s southern highlands to a few hundred million years in the youngest volcanic areas were obtained in this way. 
 
    The detailed appearance of Martian impact craters provides an important piece of information about conditions just below the planet’s surface. Martian craters are surrounded by ejecta (debris formed as a result of an impact) that looks quite different from its lunar counterparts. A comparison of the Copernicus crater on the Moon with the (fairly typical) crater Yuty on Mars demonstrates the differences. The ejecta surrounding the lunar crater is just what one would expect from an explosion ejecting a large volume of dust, soil, and boulders. ?However, the ejecta on Mars gives the distinct impression of a liquid that has splashed or flowed out of the crater. ?Geologists think that this fluidized ejecta crater indicates that a layer of permafrost, or water ice, lies just a few meters under the surface. ?Explosive impacts heated and liquefied the ice, resulting in the fluid appearance of the ejecta. ? 
 
1.	The word “enormous” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	important 
B)	extremely large 
C)	highly unusual 
D)	active 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, Olympus Mons differs from volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge in that Olympus Mons 
A)	has more complex geologic features 
B)	shows less impact cratering 
C)	is taller 
D)	was formed at a later time 
 
3.	The word “distinctive” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	deep 
B)	complex 
C)	characteristic 
D)	ancient 
 
4.	According to paragraphs 1 and 2, which of the following is NOT true of the shield volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge? 
A)	They have broad, sloping sides. 
B)	They are smaller than the largest volcano on Mars. 
C)	They have channels that resemble the lava channels of volcanoes on Earth. 
D)	They are over 25 kilometers tall. 
 
5.	The word “roughly” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	typically 
B)	frequently 
C)	actually 
D)	approximately 
 
6.	In paragraph 3, why does the author compare Maxwell Mons on Venus to the Hawaiian shield volcanoes on Earth? 
A)	To help explain the relationship between surface gravity and volcano height 
B)	To explain why Mars’s surface gravity is only 40 percent of Earth’s 
C)	To point out differences between the surface gravity of Earth and the surface gravity of Venus 
D)	To argue that there are more similarities than differences between volcanoes on different planets 
 
7.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Although direct evidence of recent eruptions is lacking, scientists believe that these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago. 
B)	Scientists estimate that volcanoes active more recently than 100 million years ago will still have extensive impact cratering on their slopes. 
C)	If, as some evidence suggests, these volcanoes erupted as recently as 100 m million years ago, they may continue to be intermittently active. 
D)	Although these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago, there is no direct evidence of recent or ongoing eruptions. 
 
8.	The word “considerably” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	frequently 
B)	significantly 
C)	clearly 
D)	surprisingly 
 
9.	According to paragraph 4, what is demonstrated by the fact that craters fill in much faster on Mars than on the Moon? 
A)	Erosion from meteoritic impacts takes place more quickly on Mars than on the Moon. 
B)	There is more dust on Mars than on the Moon. 
C)	The surface of Mars is a dry desert. 
D)	Wind is a powerful eroding force on Mars. 
 
10.	In paragraph 4, why does the author point out that Mars has few ancient craters that are less than 5 kilometers in diameter? 
A)	To explain why scientists believe that the surface matter filling Martian craters is mostly dust 
B)	To explain why scientists believe that the impact craters on Mars were created by meteoroids 
C)	To support the claim that the Martian atmosphere is an efficient erosive agent
D)  To argue that Mars experienced fewer ancient impacts than the Moon did 
 
11.	According to paragraph 5, what have scientists been able to determine from studies of large impact cratering on Mars? 
A)	Some Martian volcanoes are much older than was once thought. 
B)	The age of Mars’s surface can vary from area to area. 
C)	Large impact craters are not reliable indicators of age in areas with high volcanic activity. 
D)	Some areas of the Martian surface appear to be older than they actually are. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, the ejecta of Mars’s crater Yuty differs from the ejecta of the Moon’s Copernicus crater in that the ejecta of the Yuty crater 
A)	has now become part of a permafrost layer 
B)	contains a large volume of dust, soil, and boulders 
C)	suggests that liquid once came out of the surface at the crater site 
D)	was thrown a comparatively long distance from the center of the crater 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   This surface feature has led to speculation about what may lie under Mars’s surface. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Volcanoes and impact craters are major features of Martian geology. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Mars has shield volcanoes, some of which are extremely tall because of the planet’s low surface gravity. 
B)	Although the erosive power of the Martian atmosphere ensures that Mars has fewer craters than the Moon does, impact craters are prominent on Mars’s surface. 
C)	Plate motion on Mars, once considered to have played no role in shaping the planet’s surface, is now seen as being directly associated with the planet’s earliest volcanoes.. 
D)	Scientists cannot yet reliably estimate the age of the Martian surface because there has been too much erosion of it. 
E)	Scientists have been surprised to discover that conditions just below the surface of Mars are very similar to conditions just below the surface of the Moon. 
F)	Studies of crater ejecta have revealed the possibility of a layer of permafrost below the surface of Mars. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. B  2. C  3. C  4. D  5. D  6. A  7. C  8. B  9. D  10. C 
 
         11. B  12. C  13. B  14. A, B, F 
The Decline of Venetian Shipping 
 
    In the late thirteenth century, northern Italian cities such as Genoa, Florence, and Venice began an economic resurgence that made them into the most important economic centers of Europe. By the seventeenth century, however, other European powers had taken over, as the Italian cities lost much of their economic might. 
 
    This decline can be seen clearly in the changes that affected Venetian shipping and trade. First, Venice’s intermediary functions in the Adriatic Sea, where it had dominated the business of shipping for other parties, were lost to direct trading. In the fifteenth century there was little problem recruiting sailors to row the galleys (large ships propelled by oars); guilds (business associations) were required to provide rowers, and through a draft system free citizens served compulsorily when called for. ?In the early sixteenth century the shortage of rowers was not serious because the demand for galleys was limited by a move to round ships (round-hulled ships with more cargo space), which required fewer rowers. ?But the shortage of crews proved to be a greater and greater problem, despite continuous appeal to Venice’s tradition of maritime greatness. ?Even though sailors’ wages doubled among the northern Italian cities from 1550 to 1590, this did not elicit an increased supply. ? 
 
  The problem in shipping extended to the Arsenale, Venice’s huge and powerful shipyard. Timber ran short, and it was necessary to procure it from farther and farther away. In ancient Roman times, the Italian peninsula had great forests of fir preferred for warships, but scarcity was apparent as early as the early fourteenth century. Arsenale officers first brought timber from the foothills of the Alps, then from north toward Trieste, and finally from across the Adriatic. Private shipbuilders were required to buy their oak abroad. As the costs of shipbuilding rose, Venice clung to its outdated standards while the Dutch were innovating in lighter and more easily handled ships. 
 
    The step from buying foreign timber to buying foreign ships was regarded as a short one, especially when complaints were heard in the latter sixteenth century that the standards and traditions of the Arsenale were funning down. Work was stretched out and done poorly. Older workers had been allowed to stop work a half hour before the regular time, and in 1601 younger workers left with them. Merchants complained that the privileges reserved for Venetian-built and –owned ships were first extended to those Venetians who bought ships from abroad and then to foreign-built and –owned vessels. Historian Frederic Lane observes that after the loss of ships in battle in the late sixteenth century, the shipbuilding industry no longer had the capacity to recover that it had displayed at the start of the century. 
 
    The conventional explanation for the loss of Venetian dominance in trade is the establishment of the Portuguese direct sea route to the East, replacing the overland Silk Road from the Black Sea and the highly profitable Indian Ocean-caravan-eastern Mediterranean route to Venice. The Portuguese Vasco da Gama’s voyage around southern Africa to India took place at the end of the fifteenth century, and by 1502 the trans-Arabian caravan route had been cut off by political unrest. 
 
    The Venetian Council finally allowed round ships to enter the trade that was previously reserved for merchant galleys, thus reducing transport costs by one third. Prices of spices delivered by ship from the eastern Mediterranean came to equal those of spices transported by Portuguese vessels, but the increase in quantity with both routes in operation drove the price far down. Gradually, Venice’s role as a storage and distribution center for spices and silk, dyes, cotton, and gold decayed, and by the early seventeenth century Venice had lost its monopoly in markets such as France and southern Germany. 
 
    Venetian shipping had started to decline from about 1530 – before the entry into the Mediterranean of large volumes of Dutch and British shipping – and was clearly outclassed by the end of the century. A contemporary of Shakespeare (1564 – 1616) observed that the productivity of Italian shipping had declined, compared with that of the British, because of conservatism and loss of expertise. Moreover, Italian sailors were deserting and emigrating, and captains, no longer recruited from the ranks of nobles, were weak on navigation. 
1.	The word “resurgence” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	transformation 
B)	comeback 
C)	program 
D)	expansion 
 
2.	The word “compulsorily” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	for free 
B)	for a time 
C)	by requirement 
D)	by design 
 
3.	According to paragraph 2, which of the following contributed to the decline of Venetian shipping? 
A)	The loss of trade in the Adriatic Sea 
B)	The move from galleys to round ships 
C)	The decreased demand for galleys 
D)	The doubling of sailors’ wages 
 
4.	All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 2 as ways that Venice provided rowers for its galleys EXCEPT: 
A)	requiring business associations to provide sailors 
B)	recruiting sailors from other cities in northern Italy 
C)	drafting Venetian citizens into services as rowers 
D)	appealing to the tradition of Venice as a sea power 
 
5.	The word “outdated” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	strict 
B)	enforced 
C)	improved 
D)	old-fashioned 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, why did the building of ships in Venetian shipyards become increasingly expensive? 
A)	The wages of officers and workers in the Arsenale kept rising. 
B)	Roman shipyards were using all the available fir trees for their warships. 
C)	The timber used in shipbuilding had to be brought from farther and farther away. 
D)	Venetian standards required that shipbuilders use top-quality materials. 
 
7.	All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 and 4 as contributing to the problems of the Venetian shipbuilding industry at the end of the sixteenth century 
EXCEPT: 
A)	The quality of work performed in the Arsenale had declined. 
B)	Venetian-built ships were heavy and generally inefficient. 
C)	Arsenale shipbuilders worked more slowly. 
D)	Only a few merchants controlled the buying and selling of most of the Venetian-built ships. 
 
 
8.	Which of the following sentences below best expressed the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	The loss of ships in battle at the end of the sixteenth century showed that Venetian shipbuilders lacked the skills they had possessed at the beginning of the century. 
B)	Venetian shipbuilding failed to quickly replace the ships lost in battle at the end of the sixteenth century as it would have done earlier in the century. 
C)	Frederic Lane noted that Venice lost ships in battle at the end of the sixteenth century, showing that Venetian shipbuilding was no longer known for its reliability. 
D)	Venetian shipbuilding had been known for its high quality of work at the beginning of the sixteenth century, but toward the end of the century Venetian ships were poorer in quality. 
 
9.	The word “conventional” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	informal 
B)	logical 
C)	correct 
D)	usual 
 
10.	Why does the author mention “Vasco da Gama’s voyage around southern Africa to India” in the passage? 
A)	To indicate how the Portuguese came to challenge Venetian dominance of trade with the East 
B)	To explain why political troubles resulted in the closing of the usual routes to India 
C)	To prove that Venetians could not sail round ships as efficiently as sailors from other countries did 
D)	To show that Venetian reliance on round ships rather than galleys proved to be a weakness 
 
11.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the Venetian Council’s decision concerning the use of round ships? 
A)	It resulted in a return to profitable trading in luxury goods for Venetian merchants. 
B)	Ultimately it did not restore the superiority in the spice trade that Venice had enjoyed earlier. 
C)	It eventually enabled Venetian merchants to increase the quantity and price of the spices they sold in Europe. 
D)	It meant a long-awaited improvement in the fortunes of the shipbuilding industry in Venice. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, in the sixteenth century the price of spices declined because 
A)	France and Germany established monopolies and dictated prices 
B)	Venetian merchant galleys competed with Venetian round ships for the spice trade 
C)	more spices were available because both the Venetians and the Portuguese were importing them 
D)	increased demand for silk, dyes, cotton, and gold meant that people had less money to spend on spices 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   The increase in rewards still did not attract young people to this hard life, and convicted criminals and slaves were pressed into service. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   The loss of power and prestige of Italian cities by the sixteenth century is clearly seen in the decline of Venetian shipping. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Venetian ships were famous for carrying large cargoes of spices and luxury goods around the world in fast, oar-driven galleys. 
B)	Venetian round ships bringing spices and silk from the East helped drive prices down so that ordinary people could afford to buy them. 
C)	A shortage of timber for building the traditional galleys and a lack of sailors to row them meant a loss of Venetian shipping business. 
D)	Venice failed to keep up with improvements in ship design, and the cost of shipbuilding rose as quality and efficiency declined. 
E)	The Venetian Council made sure that Venetian-built and –owned ships kept special privileges in transporting luxury goods in and out of Venice. 
F)	The Portuguese direct sea route to the East adversely affected Venetian trade, and Venice fell behind the Dutch and the British in the quality of their ships and sailing skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. B  2. C  3. A  4. B  5. D  6. C  7. D  8. B  9. D  10. A 
 
         11. B  12. C  13. D  14. C, D, F 
The Evolutionary Origin of Plants 
 
The evolutionary history of plants has been marked by a series of adaptations. The ancestors of plants were photosynthetic single-celled organisms probably similar to today’s algae. Like modern algae, the organisms that gave rise to plants presumably lacked true roots, stems, leaves, and complex reproductive structures such as flowers. All of these features appeared later in the evolutionary history of plants. Of today’s different groups of algae, green algae are probably the most similar to ancestral plants. This supposition stems from the close phylogenetic (natural evolutionary) relationship between the two groups. DNA comparisons have shown that green algae are plants’ closest living relatives. In addition, other lines of evidence support the hypothesis that land plants evolved from ancestral e green algae: green algae used the same type of chlorophyll and accessory pigments in photosynthesis as do land plants. This would not be true of red or brown algae. Green algae store food as starch, as do land plants and have cell walls made of cellulose, similar in composition to those of land plants. Again, the food storage and cell wall molecules of red and brown algae are different. 
 
    Today green algae live mainly in freshwater, suggesting that their early evolutionary history may have occurred in freshwater habitats. If so, the green algae would have been subjected to environmental pressures that resulted in adaptations that enhanced their potential to give rise to land-dwelling organisms. 
 
    ?The environmental conditions of freshwater habitats, unlike those of ocean habitats, are highly variable. ?Water temperature can fluctuate seasonally or even daily, and changing levels of rainfall can lead to fluctuations in the concentration of chemicals in the water or even to periods in which the aquatic habitat dries up. ?Ancient freshwater green algae must have evolved features that enabled them to withstand extremes of temperature and periods of dryness. ? These adaptations served their descendants well as they invaded land. 
 
    The terrestrial world is green now, but it did not start out that way. When plants first made the transition ashore more than 400 million years ago, the land was barren and desolate, inhospitable to life. From a plant’s evolutionary viewpoint, however, it was also a land of opportunity, free of competitors and predators and full of carbon dioxide and sunlight (the raw materials for photosynthesis, which are present in far higher concentrations in air than in water). So once natural selection had shaped the adaptations that helped plants overcome the obstacles to terrestrial living, plants prospered and diversified. 
 
    When plants pioneered the land, they faced a range of challenges posed by terrestrial environments. On land, the supportive buoyancy of water is missing, the plant is no longer bathed in a nutrient solution, and the air tends to dry things out. These conditions favored the evolution of structures that support the body, vessels that transport water and nutrients to all parts of the plant, and structures that conserve water. The resulting adaptations to dry land include some structural features that arose early in plant evolution; now these features are common to virtually all land plants. They include roots or rootlike structures, a waxy cuticle that covers the surfaces of leaves and stems and limits the evaporation of water, and pores called stomata in leaves and stems that allow gas exchange but close when water is scarce, thus reducing water loss. Other adaptations occurred later in the transition to terrestrial life and are now widespread but not universal among plants. These include conducting vessels that transport water and minerals upward from the roots and that move photosynthetic products from the leaves to the rest of the plant body and the stiffening substance lignin, which supports the plant body, helping it expose maximum surface area to sunlight. 
   These adaptations allowed an increasing diversity of plant forms to exploit dry land. Life on land, however, also required new methods of transporting sperm to eggs. Unlike aquatic and marine forms, land plants cannot always rely on water currents to carry their sex cells and disperse their fertilized eggs. So the most successful groups of land plants are those that evolved methods of fertilized sex cell dispersal that are independent of water and structures that protect developing embryos from drying out. Protected embryos and waterless dispersal of sex cells were achieved with the origin of seed plants and the key evolutionary innovations that they introduced: pollen, seeds, and, later, flowers and fruits. 
 
1.	The word “presumably” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	originally 
B)	supposedly 
C)	obviously 
D)	usually 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of ancestral plants EXCEPT:    
A) They had cellulose-based cell walls. 
B)	They were closely related to green algae. 
C)	They were able to store nutrients. 
D)	They had a sophisticated multicellular structure 
 
3.	The phrase “subjected to” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	restricted by 
B)	distant from 
C)	exposed to 
D)	combined with 
 
4.	What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about ancient green algae? 
A)	They lived in a generally wet environment that was sometimes dry. 
B)	They adapted better to changes in water temperature than they did to other changes in the environment. 
C)	They inhabited areas that were close to the ocean. 
D)	They lived primarily on land. 
 
5.	The word “desolate” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	dusty 
B)	hardened   
C) deserted 
            D) dried out 
 
6.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Terrestrial plants had the advantages of not having rivals and having easy access to photosynthetic material. 
B)	The abundance of photosynthetic material made life on land easier for pioneering plants. 
C)	Once plants had eliminated their competitors and their predators, their evolutionary process proceeded smoothly. 
D)	Plant evolution eliminated competitors and made the process of photosynthesis more efficient. 
 
7.	According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about the terrestrial world at the time it was colonized by plants? 
A)	It was exposed to high levels of solar radiation. 
B)	It contained a limited supply of carbon dioxide. 
C)	It had developed 400 million years earlier. 
D)	It lacked the presence of any organisms. 
 
8.	The word “posed” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	shared 
B)	presented 
C)	strengthened 
D)	concealed 
 
9.	According to paragraph 5, all of the following are problems that early terrestrial plants had to overcome EXCEPT: 
A)	a tendency to become dry 
B)	the inability to limit surface sunlight 
C)	the absence of a structure to support the body of the plant 
D)	the inability to transport water and minerals through the plant 
 
10.	What purpose does paragraph 5 serve in the larger discussion of the origins of terrestrial plants? 
A)	To emphasize how long it took for ancestral plants to adjust to life on land 
B)	To disprove the argument that land plants adapted easily to their new terrestrial environment 
C)	To explain how plant colonization changed the physical environment of the terrestrial world 
D)	To describe how ancestral plants solved the problems they confronted in colonizing land 
 
11.	According to paragraph 6, the adaptations made by terrestrial plants had which of the following effects? 
A)	Plants developed reproductive strategies usable in both land and water environments. 
B)	The plant diversity achieved in water environments diminished on land. 
C)	Seed plants became the dominant species among plants. 
D)	A greater range of plants was able to develop. 
 
12.	Which of the following best describes the author’s presentation of the information about land plants? 
A)	The author provides an overview of the evolutionary relationships between specific species of algae and land plants. 
B)	The author discusses the transformations plants underwent in the process of changing from an aquatic to a terrestrial environment. 
C)	The author establishes a pattern of similarity between major land and water plant groups. 
D)	The author presents evidence to support the hypothesis that plants first fully evolved in water before finding their way on to land. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   Scientists believe that chemical changes and a thicker exterior, among other things, may have helped ancient algae overcome the conditions in their environment. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   In moving from water to land, ancestral plants overcame many obstacles in order to survive. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Neither brown nor red algae are likely to be ancestors of plants because of their difference in pigmentation. 
B)	The instability of freshwater habitats caused marine algae to develop adaptations to their harsh environment. 
C)	The colonization of land by plants was a major revolution in the history of Earth. 
D)	Terrestrial plants adjusted to life on land by undergoing structural changes that enabled them to support themselves, resist drying, and exchange gases. 
E)	To colonize new terrestrial habitats, plants needed to create a way of reproducing without water. 
F)	Once plants had overcome the challenges posed by terrestrial life, they prospered by becoming less diverse. 
 
????: 1. B  2. D  3. C  4. A  5. C  6. A  7. D  8. B  9. B  10. D 
 
         11. D  12. B  13. D  14. B, D, E 
 
 
TPO 26  
 
Energy and the Industrial Revolution 
 
    For years historians have sought to identify crucial elements in the eighteenth-century rise in industry, technology, and economic power known as the Industrial Revolution, and many give prominence to the problem of energy. Until the eighteenth century, people relied on energy derived from plants as well as animal and human muscle to provide power. Increased efficiency in the use of water and wind helped with such tasks as pumping, milling, or sailing. However, by the eighteenth century, Great Britain in particular was experiencing an energy shortage. Wood, the primary source of heat for homes and industries and also used in the iron industry as processed charcoal, was diminishing in supply. Great Britain had large amounts of coal; however, there were not yet efficient means by which to produce mechanical energy or to power machinery. This was to occur with progress in the development of the steam engine. 
 
    In the late 1700s James Watt designed an efficient and commercially viable steam engine that was soon applied to a variety of industrial uses as it became cheaper to use. The engine helped solve the problem of draining coal mines of groundwater and increased the production of coal needed to power steam engines elsewhere. A rotary engine attached to the steam engine enabled shafts to be turned and machines to be driven, resulting in mills using steam power to spin and weave cotton. Since the steam engine was fired by coals, the large mills did not need to be located by rivers, as had mills that used water-driven machines. The shift to increased mechanization in cotton production is apparent in the import of raw cotton and the sale of cotton goods. Between 1760 and 1850, the amount of raw cotton imported increased 230 times. 
Production of British cotton goods increased sixtyfold, and cotton cloth became Great Britain’s most important product, accounting for one-half of all exports. The success of the steam engine resulted in increased demands for coal, and the consequent increase in coal production was made possible as the steam-powered pumps drained water from the ever-deeper coal seams found below the water table. 
 
    The availability of steam power and the demands for new machines facilitated the transformation of the iron industry. Charcoal, made from wood and thus in limited supply, was replaced with coal-derived coke (substance left after coal is heated) as steam-driven bellows came into use for producing of raw iron. Impurities were burnt away with the use of coke, producing a high-quality refined iron. Reduced cost was also instrumental in developing steam-powered rolling mills capable of producing finished iron of various shapes and sizes. The resulting boom in the iron industry expanded the annual iron output by more than 170 times between 1740 and 1840, and by the 1850s Great Britain was producing more tons of iron than the rest of the world combined. The developments in the iron industry were in part a response to the demand for more machines and the ever-widening use of higher-quality iron in other industries. 
 
    Steam power and iron combined to revolutionize transport, which in turn had further implications. Improvements in road construction and sailing had occurred, but shipping heavy freight over land remained expensive, even with the use of rivers and canals wherever possible. Parallel rails had long been used in mining operations to move bigger loads, but horses were still the primary source of power. ? However, the arrival of the steam engine initialed a complete transformation in rail transportation, entrenching and expanding the Industrial Revolution. ? As transportation improved, distant and larger markets within the nation could be reached, thereby encouraging the development of larger factories to keep pace with increasing sales. ? Greater productivity and rising demands provided entrepreneurs with profits that could be reinvested to take advantage of new technologies to further expand capacity, or to seek alternative investment opportunities. ? Also, the availability of jobs in railway construction attracted many rural laborers accustomed to seasonal and temporary employment. When the work was completed, many moved to other construction jobs or to factory work in cities and towns, where they became part of an expanding working class. 
 
1.	Why does the author provide the information that “Great Britain had large amounts of coal”? 
A)	To reject the claim that Britain was facing an energy shortage in the eighteenth century 
B)	To explain why coal rather than other energy resources became the primary source of heat for homes and industries in eighteenth-century Britain 
C)	To indicate that Britain’s energy shortage was not the result of a lack of fuel 
D)	To explain why coal mining became an important industry in nineteenth-century Britain 
 
2.	What was “the problem of energy” that had to be solved to make the Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth century possible? 
A)	Water and wind could not be used efficiently. 
B)	There was no efficient way to power machinery. 
C)	Steam engines required large amounts of coal, which was in short supply. 
D)	Neither humans nor animals were strong enough to provide the power required for industrial application. 
 
3.	Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 2 as a development in cotton mills brought about by Watt’s steam engine? 
A) The importing of huge quantities of raw cotton by Britain 
B)	Increased mechanization 
C)	More possibilities for mill location 
D)	Smaller mills 
 
4.	The phrase “apparent in” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	clearly seen in 
B)	aided by 
C) associate with 
D) followed by 
 
5.	According to paragraph 2, what was Britain’s most important export by 1850? 
A)	Raw cotton 
B)	Cotton cloth 
C)	Steam-powered pumps 
D)	Coal 
 
6.	The word “consequent” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	resulting 
B)	encouraging 
C)	well documented 
D)	immediate 
 
7.	What is the role of paragraph 2 in the passage as a whole? 
A)	It explains how by increasing the supply of raw materials from other countries, British industries were able to reduce costs and increase production. 
B)	It explains how the production of mechanical energy and its benefits spread quickly across countries that were linked commercially with Great Britain. 
C)	It demonstrates why developments in a single industry could not have caused the Industrial Revolution. 
D)	It illustrates why historians have assigned great importance to the issue of energy in the rise of the Industrial Revolution. 
 
8.	According to paragraph 3, why was the use of coke important for the iron industry? 
A)	It helped make wood into charcoal. 
B)	It reduced the dependency on steam-powered machines used for the production of iron. 
C)	It replaced charcoal in the production of raw and refined iron. 
D)	It powered the machines used to extract coal in coal mines. 
 
9.	According to paragraph 3, all of the following were true of the iron industry in Great Britain during the 1800s EXCEPT: 
A)	Steam-driven bellows were used to produce raw iron. 
B)	By the 1850s Britain was the world’s largest producer of iron. 
C)	Steam-powered mills made it possible to produce iron of different shapes and sizes. 
D)	Greater demand for higher-quality iron increased its price. 
 
10.	The word “initiated” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) anticipated 
B)	accelerated 
C)	spread 
D)	started 
 
11.	Paragraph 4 implies which of the following about the transformation in rail transportation? 
A)	Because railway construction employed mostly rural laborers, unemployment increased among urban workers. 
B)	It resulted in more trade within the country, but less trade with markets that could be reached only by ocean shipping. 
C)	It made shipping freight overland to distant markets less expensive. 
D)	It resulted in higher wages for factory workers. 
 
12.	The phrase “accustomed to” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	in need of 
B)	used to 
C)	tired of 
D)	encouraged by 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
The first steam-powered locomotives were slow by they rapidly improved in speed and carrying capacity. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
The coming of the Industrial Revolution in eighteenth-century Britain depended on the development of the steam engine to power machinery. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	For years, historians disregarded the issue of energy as a major element in the rise of the Industrial Revolution and focused instead on technological development and increased production. 
B)	By 1850, the use of steam power in Britain’s mills, mines, and iron industry 
made Britain a world leader in the production of cotton cloth and iron. 
C)	The introduction and growth of steam-powered rail transport was a major factor in Britain’s economic expansion during the Industrial Revolution. 
D)	Once the basic infrastructure was in place, the Industrial Revolution fueled itself with enlarging markets requiring ever more expansion of factories and workforce. 
E)	An expansion of the industrial Revolution outside Great Britain occurred when British industries began to import raw cotton and high-quality iron. 
F)	By the end of the 1800s, railway construction attracted so many laborers that factories could not find enough workers to keep up with increasing sales. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. C  2. B  3. D  4. A  5. B  6. A  7. D  8. C  9. D  10. D 
 
         11. C  12. B  13. B  14. B, C, D 
 
Survival of Plants and Animals in Desert Conditions 
 
    The harsh conditions in deserts are intolerable for most plants and animals. Despite these conditions, however, many varieties of plants and animals have adapted to deserts in a number of ways. Most plant tissues die if their water content falls too low: the nutrients that feed plants are transmitted by water; water is a raw material in the vital process of photosynthesis; and water regulates the temperature of a plant by its ability to absorb heat and because water vapor lost to the atmosphere through the leaves helps to lower plant temperatures. ? Water controls the volume of plant matter produced. ? The distribution of plants within different areas of desert is also controlled by water. ? Some areas, because of their soil texture, topographical position, or distance from rivers or groundwater, have virtually no water available to plants, whereas other do. ? 
 
    The nature of plant life in deserts is also highly dependent on the fact that they have to adapt to the prevailing aridity. There are two general classes of vegetation: long-lived perennials, which may be succulent (water-storing) and are often dwarfed and woody; and annuals or ephemerals, which have a short lift cycle and may form a fairly dense stand immediately after rain. 
 
    The ephemeral plants evade drought. Given a year of favorable precipitation, such plants will develop vigorously and produce large numbers of flowers and fruit. This replenishes the seed content of the desert soil. The seeds then lie dormant until the next wet year, when the desert blooms again. 
 
    The perennial vegetation adjusts to the aridity by means of various avoidance mechanisms. Most desert plants are probably best classified as xerophytes. They possess drought-resisting adaptations: loss of water through the leaves is reduced by means of dense hairs covering waxy leaf surfaces, by the closure of pores during the hottest times to reduce water loss, and by the rolling up or shedding of leaves at the beginning of the dry season. Some xerophytes, the succulents (including cacti), store water in their structures. Another way of countering drought is to have a limited amount of mass above ground and to have extensive root networks below ground. It is not unusual for the roots of some desert perennials to extend downward more than ten meters. Some plants are woody in type – an adaptation designed to prevent collapse of the plant tissue when water stress produces wilting. Another class of desert plant is the phreatophyte. These have adapted to the environment by the development of long taproots that penetrate downward until they approach the assured water supply provided by groundwater. Among these plants are the date palm, tamarisk, and mesquite. They commonly grow near stream channels, springs, or on the margins of lakes. 
 
    Animals also have to adapt to desert conditions, and they may do it through two forms of behavioral adaptation: they either escape or retreat. Escape involves such actions as aestivation, a condition of prolonged dormancy, or torpor, during which animals reduce their metabolic rate and body temperature during the hot season or during very dry spells. 
 
    Seasonal migration is another form of escape, especially for large mammals or birds. The term retreat is applied to the short-term escape behavior of desert animals, and it usually assumes the patter of a daily rhythm. Birds shelter in nests, rock overhangs, trees, and dense shrubs to avoid the hottest hours of the day, while mammals like the kangaroo rt burrow underground. 
 
    Some animals have behavioral, physiological, and morphological (structural) adaptations that enable them to withstand extreme conditions. For example, the ostrich has plumage that is so constructed that the feathers are long but not too dense. When conditions are hot, the ostrich erects them on its back, thus increasing the thickness of the barrier between solar radiation and the skin. The sparse distribution of the feathers, however, also allows considerable lateral air movement over the skin surface, thereby permitting further heat loss by convection. Furthermore, the birds orient themselves carefully with regard to the Sun and gently flap their wings to increase convection cooling. 
 
1.	According to paragraph 1, water provides all of the following essential functions for plants EXCEPT: 
A)	improving plants’ ability to absorb sunlight 
B)	preventing plants from becoming overheated 
C)	transporting nutrients 
D)	serving as a raw material for photosynthesis 
 
2.	Paragraph 3 suggests that during a dry year ephemerals 
A)	produce even more seeds than in a wet year 
B)	do not sprout from their seeds 
C) bloom much later than in a wet year 
D) are more plentiful than perennials 
 
3.	How is paragraph 2 related to paragraph 3? 
A)	Paragraph 2 provides a general description of desert plants, and paragraph 3 provides a scientific explanation for these observations. 
B)	Paragraph 2 divides desert plants into two categories, and paragraph 3 provides further information about one of these categories. 
C)	Paragraph 2 proposes one way of dividing desert plants into categories, and paragraph 3 explains one problem with this method of classification. 
D)	Paragraph 2 discusses two categories of desert plants, and paragraph 3 introduces a third category of plants. 
 
4.	In saying that ephemerals will develop “vigorously” when there is favorable precipitation, the author means that their development will be 
A)	sudden 
B)	early 
C)	gradual 
D)	strong and healthy 
 
5.	The word “countering” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	eliminating 
B)	making use of 
C)	acting against 
D)	experiencing 
 
6.	According to paragraph 4, some desert plants with root systems that are extraordinarily well developed have A) relatively little growth aboveground 
B)	very leafy aboveground structures 
C)	nonwoody plant tissue resistant to wilting 
D)	water stored within their roots 
 
7.	The word “assured” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	pure 
B)	diminished 
C)	guaranteed 
D)	deep 
 
8.	What do “the date palm, tamarisk, and mesquite” have in common? A) They are always found together. 
B)	They depend on surface water provided by streams, springs, and lakes. 
C)	They are phreatophytes. 
D)	Their roots are capable of breaking through hard soils. 
 
9.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	One way animals escape is by entering a state of extended dormancy, known as aestivation, during the hottest and driest times of year. 
B)	Animals can escape without using direct action, or aestivation, simply by reducing their metabolic rate and body temperature. 
C)	The actions that an animal uses to escape are known as aestivation, which sometimes involves a reduction in metabolic rate or body temperature. 
D)	When the weather is especially hot and dry, an animal may suffer from a condition known as aestivation, at which point the animal needs to escape. 
 
10.	It can be inferred from paragraph 3 that all of the places desert animals retreat to 
A)	Provide shade from the sun 
B)	Sometimes become crowded 
C)	Are places where supplies of food are plentiful 
D)	Leave the animals vulnerable to predators 
 
11.	According to paragraph 7, what special adaptation helps the ostrich cope with hot desert conditions? 
A)	Each of its feathers is very short and dense. 
B)	Its wings produce only lateral air movement when flapping. 
C)	Its feathers are very thickly set on both its back and its wings. 
D)	It can make its feather stand up on its back. 
 
12.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
    For this reason, the total amount of plant material in a desert is often 100 times less than the amount of plant material in an equivalent area of temperate forest. 
 
Where would the sentence best fit? 
 
13.	Select from the seven phrases below the two phrases that correctly characterize special adaptations found primarily in desert annuals and the three phrases that correct characterize special adaptations found primarily in desert perennials. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Woody structures 
B)	Explosive growth in wet years 
C)	Long, thin, shallow roots 
D)	Storage of water in plant tissue 
E)	Minimization of the amount of water used for photosynthesis 
F)	Short life cycle 
G)	Leaves designed to minimize water loss 
 
adaptations of annuals 
?	
?	
 
adaptations of perennials 
?	
?	
?	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. A  2. B  3. B  4. D  5. C  6. A  7. C  8. C  9. A  10. A 
 
         11. D  12. B  13.  annuals : B,F  perennials: A,D,G 
 
 
Sumer and the First Cities of the Ancient Near East 
 
    The earliest of the city states of the ancient Near East appeared at the southern end of the Mesopotamia plain, the area between the Tigris and Euphrates rives in what is now Iraq. It was here that the civilization known as Sumer emerged in its earliest form in the fifth millennium. At first sight, the plain did not appear to be a likely home for a civilization There were few natural resources, no timber, stone, or metals. Rainfall was limited, and what water there was rushed across the plain in the annual flood of melted snow. As the plain fell only 20 meters in 500 kilometers, the beds of the rivers shifted constantly. It was this that made the organization of irrigation, particularly the building of canals to channel and preserve the water, essential. Once this was done and the silt carried down by the rivers was planted, the rewards were rich: four to five times what rain-fed earth would produce. It was these conditions that allowed an elite to emerge, probably as an organizing class, and to sustain itself through the control of surplus crops. 
 
    It is difficult to isolate the factors that led to the next development – the emergence of urban settlements. The earliest, that of Eridu, about 4500 B.C.E., and Uruk, a thousand years later, center on impressive temple complexes built of mud brick. In some way, the elite had associated themselves with the power of the gods. Uruk, for instance, had two patron gods – Anu, the god of the sky and sovereign of all other gods, and Inanna, a goddess of love and war – and there were others, patrons of different cities. Human beings were at their mercy. The biblical story of the Flood may originate in Sumer. In the earliest version, the gods destroy the human race because its clamor had been so disturbing to them. 
 
    It used to be believed that before 3000 B.C.E. the political and economic life of the cities was centered on their temples, but it now seems probable that the cities had secular rulers from earliest times. ? Within the city lived administrators, craftspeople, and merchants. (Trading was important, as so many raw materials, the semiprecious stones for the decoration of the temples, timbers for roofs, and all metals, had to be imported.) ? An increasingly sophisticated system of administration led in about 3300 B.C.E. to the appearance of writing. ? The earliest script was based on logograms, with a symbol being used to express a whole word. ? The logograms were incised on damp clay tablets with a stylus with a wedge shape at its end. (The Romans called the shape cuneus and this gives the script its name of cuneiform.) Two thousand logograms have been recorded from these early centuries of writing. A more economical approach was to use a sign to express not a whole word but a single syllable. (To take an example: the Sumerian word for “head” was “sag.” Whenever a word including a syllable in which the sound “sag” was to be written, the sign for “sag” could be used to express that syllable with the remaining syllables of the word expressed by other signs.) By 2300 B.C.E. the number of signs required had been reduced to 600, and the range of words that could be expressed had widened. Texts dealing with economic matters predominated, as they always had done; but at this point works of theology, literature, history, and law also appeared. 
 
    Other innovations of the late fourth millennium include the wheel, probably developed first as a more efficient way of making pottery and then transferred to transport. A tablet engraved about 3000 B.C.E. provides the earliest known example from Sumer, a roofed boxlike sledge mounted on four solid wheels. A major development was the discovery, again about 3000 B.C.E., that if copper, which had been known in Mesopotamia since about 3500 B.C.E., was mixed with tin, a much harder metal, bronze would result. Although copper and stone tools continued to be used, bronze was far more successful in creating sharp edges that could be used as anything from saws and scythes to weapons. The period from 3000 to 1000 B.C.E., when the use of bronze became widespread, is normally referred to as the Bronze Age. 
 
1.	Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 1 as a disadvantage of the Mesopotamian plain? 
A)	There was not very much rainfall for most of the year. 
B)	Melting snow caused flooding every year. 
C)	The silt deposited by rivers damaged crops. 
D)	Timber, stone and metals were not readily available. 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, which of the following made it possible for an elite to emerge? 
A)	New crops were developed that were better suited to conditions on the Mesopotamian plain. 
B)	The richest individuals managed to gain control of the most valuable cropland. 
C)	Control over the few available natural resources made some people four to five times richer than everyone else. 
D)	The building of canals to increase agricultural output required organization. 
 
3.	The word “sustain” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	defend 
B)	promote 
C)	maintain 
D)	transform 
 
4.	According to paragraph 2, Eridu and Uruk are examples of urban settlements that 
A)	lacked the features usually found in other early urban settlements 
B)	developed around religious buildings 
C)	grew much more rapidly than most of the urban settlements found in Sumer 
D)	were mysteriously destroyed and abandoned 
 
5.	The word “sovereign” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	Counselor 
B)	Master 
C) Defender 
D) Creator 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, which of the following led to the appearance of writing? 
A)	An increasingly sophisticated administrative system 
B)	Coordination between secular and religious leaders 
C)	The large volume of trade, particularly imports 
D)	A rapidly expanding and changing population 
 
7.	In paragraph 3, why does the author provide the information that the number of signs in use had dropped from 2,000 to 600 by 2300 B.C.E.? 
A)	To argue that the development of writing involved periods of growth followed by periods of decline 
B)	To demonstrate that earlier written texts used a larger vocabulary than later texts, which were aimed at a broader audience 
C)	To support the claim that the range of words expressed by logograms varied widely depending on time period and type of text 
D)	To provide evidence for the increased efficiency of using signs to express syllables rather than whole words 
 
8.	According to paragraph 3, ancient texts most commonly dealt with 
A)	theology 
B)	literature 
C)	economics 
D)	law 
 
9.	According to paragraph 4, the earliest wheels probably A) were first developed in areas outside Mesopotamia 
B)	were used to make pottery 
C)	appeared on boxlike sledges 
D)	were used to transport goods between cities 
 
10.	The word “engraved” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	carved 
B)	produced 
C)	dated 
D)	discovered 
 
11.	Which of the following sentence below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Also around 3000 B.C.E., it was discovered that mixing copper, known from about 3500 B.C.E., with tin would create a much harder metal known as bronze. 
B)	Although copper had been known since 3500 B.C.E. in Mesopotamia, the discovery of bronze did not occur until around 3000 B.C.E. 
C)	Another major development around 3000 B.C.E. was the discovery that copper could be mixed with a much harder metal known as tin. 
D)	The development of bronze by mixing copper and tin probably occurred around 3000 B.C.E. but may have happened as early as 3500 B.C.E. 
 
12.	The word “widespread” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	obvious 
B) significant 
C)	necessary 
D)	common 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
       City life was diverse, and the population was engaged in a variety of occupations. 
 
    Where would the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose summary 
 
Irrigation made it possible for the civilization known as Sumer to arise on the Mesopotamian plain in the fifth millennium B.C.E. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The scarcity of natural resources on the plain made it necessary for a powerful elite to emerge and take charge of trade and imports. 
B)	Priests were powerful figures in the ancient civilization and controlled the political and economic life of the cities. 
C)	The economy of each city was based on a craft such as pottery or metal working, and the city of Eridu was known for its saws, scythes and weapons. 
D)	The earliest city states had one or more patron gods and were build around central temple complexes. 
E)	Writing appeared in the form of logograms and later developed into a system using signs to represent syllables rather than whole words. 
F)	The development of the wheel and the creation of bronze were important innovations in Sumer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. C  2. D  3. C  4. B  5. B  6. A  7. D  8. C  9. B  10. A 
 
         11. A  12. D  13. A  14. D, E, F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TPO 27   
 
Crafts in the Ancient Near East 
 
     Some of the earliest human civilizations arose in southern Mesopotamia, in what is now southern Iraq, in the fourth millennium B.C.E. In the second half of that millennium, in the south around the city of Uruk, there was an enormous escalation in the area occupied by permanent settlements. A large part of that increase took place in Uruk itself, which became a real urban center surrounded by a set of secondary settlements. While population estimates are notoriously unreliable, scholars assume that Uruk inhabitants were able to support themselves from the agricultural production of the fields surrounding the city, which could be reached with a daily commute. But Uruk’s dominant size in the entire region, far surpassing that of other settlements, indicates that it was a regional center and a true city. Indeed, it was the first city in human history. 
 
     The vast majority of its population remained active in agriculture, even those people living within the city itself. But a small segment of the urban society started to specialize in nonagricultural tasks as a result of the city’s role as a regional center. Within the productive sector, there was a growth of a variety of specialist craftspeople. Early in the Uruk period, the use of undecorated utilitarian pottery was probably the result of specialized mass production. In an early fourth-millennium level of the Eanna archaeological site at Uruk, a pottery style appears that is most characteristic of this process, the so-called beveled-rim bowl. It is a rather shallow bowl that was crudely made in a mold; hence, in only a limited number of standard sizes. For some unknown reason, many were discarded, often still intact, and thousands have been found all over the Near East. The beveled-rim bowl is one of the most telling diagnostic finds for identifying an Uruk-period site. Of importance is the fact that it was produced rapidly in large amounts, most likely by specialists in a central location. 
 
     A variety of documentation indicates that certain goods, once made by a family member as one of many duties, were later made by skilled artisans. Certain images depict groups of people, most likely women, involved in weaving textiles, an activity we know from later third-millennium texts to have been vital in the economy and to have been centrally administered. Also, a specialized metal-producing workshop may have been excavated in a small area at Uruk. It contained a number of channels lined by a sequence of holes, about 50 centimeters deep, all showing burn marks and filled with ashes. This has been interpreted as the remains of a workshop where molten metal was scooped up from the channel and poured into molds in the holes. Some type of mass production by specialists was involved here. 
 
     Objects themselves suggest that they were the work of skilled professionals. In the late Uruk period (3500 – 3100 B.C.E.), there first appeared a type of object that remained characteristic for Mesopotamia throughout its entire history: the cylinder seal. ?This was a small cylinder, usually no more than 3 centimeters high and 2 centimeters in diameter, of shell, bone, faience (a glassy type of stoneware), or various types of stones, on which a scene was carved into the surface. ?When rolled over a soft material—primarily the clay of bullae (round seals), tablets, or clay lumps attached to boxes, jars, or door bolts—the scene would appear in relief, easily legible. ?The technological knowledge needed to carve it was far superior to that for stamp seals, which had happened in the early Neolithic period (approximately 10,000 – 5000 B.C.E.). ?From the first appearance of cylinder seals, the carved scenes could be highly elaborate and refined, indicating the work of specialist stone-cutters. Similarly, the late Uruk period shows the first monumental art, relief, and statuary in the round, made with a degree of mastery that only a professional could have produced. 
 
Glossary 
relief : a type of sculpture in which the subjects project from the background 
 
1.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Although scholars cannot accurately determine the size of the Uruk population, they know the citizens were not dependent on agriculture. 
B)	Scholars do not have enough evidence to determine whether the agricultural areas just outside of Uruk were large enough to feed the city’s population. 
C)	Because city populations cannot feed themselves, scholars think the surrounding farms provided food for the people of Uruk. 
D)	Scholars believed that the inhabitants of Uruk were able to support themselves from produce grown in fields surrounding the city. 
 
2.	The word “surpassing” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	preceding 
B)	exceeding 
C)	challenging 
D)	outlasting 
 
3.	According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of the ancient settlement at Uruk EXCEPT: 
A)	It was a permanent settlement. 
B)	It was self-sufficient. 
C)	It was one of a group of other large settlements. 
D)	It had easy access to the land where its crops were grown. 
2.	The word “intact” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	unsold 
B)	unused 
C)	undamaged 
D)	unpainted 
 
5.	According to paragraph 2, which of the following best describes the beveled-rim bowls from the Eanna archaeological site at Uruk? 
A)	They were discarded because they became unpopular. 
B)	They varied greatly in shape and decoration. 
C)	They were each individually styled. 
D)	They were made in only a few sizes. 
 
6.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about craft production in the Uruk period? 
A)	Specialists in nonagricultural tasks obtained a higher social status than those engaged in agricultural production. 
B)	People not needed for farming could perform other more specialized activities. 
C)	Ancient crafts were beginning to be produced for both utilitarian and decorative purposes. 
D)	Pottery making was the only craft known during the fourth millennium. 
 
7.	According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of textile production after the fourth millennium? 
A)	It had an important commercial value. 
B)	It existed but was not well organized. 
C)	It is not documented in the archaeological record. 
D)	It was carried on by individuals in their own homes. 
 
8.	The word “interpreted” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	documented 
B)	debated    
C) displayed 
   D) understood 
 
9.	What is the purpose of paragraph 3? 
A)	To contrast the productivity of crafts workers in the third and fourth millennia 
B)	To provide additional evidence of mass production by crafts workers 
C)	To suggest that an early form of urban settlement may have existed before Uruk 
D)	To contrast the development of weaving and pottery in Uruk 
 
10.	The word “legible” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	printable    
B) enjoyable 
C)	recognizable 
D)	available 
 
11.	Paragraph 4 suggests which of the following about the significance of Mesopotamian cylinder seals? 
A)	They were designed more for home than for legal use. 
B)	They demonstrate that their creators were professionals. 
C)	They were the first example of seals made from materials other than stone.
D)	They were the first example of carved seals. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 4, one of the artistic achievements of the late Uruk culture was 
A)	its sophisticated sculpture and relief carvings 
B)	its architecturally complex monuments 
C)	its invention of stamp seals carved from stone 
D)	its use of highly refined glassy stoneware 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   When viewed on the curved surfaces of the cylinder, the image looked distored, but the carved image served only as a mold. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Uruk, located in ancient Mesopotamia, flourished in the fourth millennium B.C.E. and was the first city in human history. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	A variety of evidence indicates that Uruk, while it supported itself primarily by agriculture, also had specialized craft workers. 
B)	Archaeological evidence from across the Near East indicates that Uruk was a center for the production and export of highly decorated pottery made by craft specialists in private homes. 
C)	Cylinder seals from the late Uruk period are far superior to the stamp seals of the earlier Neolithic period. 
D)	The large number, standardized sizes, and simple molded construction of a type of pottery produced in Uruk demonstrate specialized, centrally organized mass production. 
E)	The monumental sculptures of Uruk were made by the specialist stone cutters who also produced small-scale relief scenes on shell, bone and faience. 
F)	The carved designs on cylinder seals produced in Uruk are of such technical and artistic excellence that they could only have been produced by professional artisans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. D  2. B  3. C  4. C  5. D  6. B  7. A  8. D  9. B  10. C 
 
         11. B  12. A  13. B  14. A, D, F 
The Formation of Volcanic Islands 
 
     Earth’s surface is not made up of a single sheet of rock that forms a crust but rather a number of “tectonic plates” that fit closely, like the pieces of giant jigsaw puzzle. Some plates carry islands or continents; others form the seafloor. All are slowly moving because the plates float on a denser semiliquid mantle, the layer between the crust and Earth’s core. The plates have edges that are spreading ridges (where two plates are moving apart and new seafloor is being created), subduction zones (where two plates collide and one plunges beneath the other), or transform faults (where two plates neither converge nor diverge but merely move past one another). It is at the boundaries between plates that most of Earth’s volcanism and earthquake activity occur. 
 
     Generally speaking, the interiors of plates are geologically uneventful. However, there are exceptions. A glance at a map of the Pacific Ocean reveals that there are many islands far out at sea that are actually volcanoes—many no longer active, some overgrown with coral—that originated from activity at points in the interior of the Pacific Plate that forms the Pacific seafloor. 
 
     How can volcanic activity occur so far from a plate boundary? The Hawaiian Islands provide a very instructive answer. ? Like many other island groups, they form a chain. ? The Hawaiian Island Chain extends northwest from the island of Hawaii. ? In the 1840s American geologist James Daly observed that the different Hawaiian Islands seem to share a similar geologic evolution but are progressively more eroded, and therefore probably older, toward the northwest. ? Then in 1963, in the early days of the development of the theory of plate tectonics, Canadian geophysicist Tuzo Wilson realized that this age progression could result if the islands were formed on a surface plate moving over a fixed volcanic source in the interior. Wilson suggested that the long chain of volcanoes stretching northwest from Hawaii is simply the surface expression of a long-lived volcanic source located beneath the tectonic plate in the mantle. Today’s most northwestern island would have been the first to form. Then, as the plate moved slowly northwest, new volcanic islands would have formed as the plate moved over the volcanic source. The most recent island, Hawaii, would be at the end of the chain and is now over the volcanic source. 
 
    Although this idea was not immediately accepted, the dating of lavas in the Hawaiian (and other) chains showed that their ages increase away from the presently active volcano, just as Daly had suggested. Wilson’s analysis of these data is now a central part of plate tectonics. Most volcanoes that occur in the interiors of plates are believed to be produced by mantle plumes, columns of molten rock that rise from deep within the mantle. A volcano remains an active “hot spot” as long as it is over the plume. The plumes apparently originate at great depths, perhaps as deep as the boundary between the core and the mantle, and many have been active for a very long time. The oldest volcanoes in the Hawaiian hot-spot trail have ages close to 80 million years. Other islands, including Tahiti and Easter Island in the Pacific, Reunion and Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, and indeed most of the large islands in the world’s oceans, owe their existence to mantle plumes. 
 
     The oceanic volcanic islands and their hot-spot trails are thus especially useful for geologists because they record the past locations of the plate over a fixed source. They therefore permit the reconstruction of the process of seafloor spreading, and consequently of the geography of continents and of ocean basins in the past. For example, given the current position of the Pacific Plate, Hawaii is above the Pacific Ocean hot spot. So the position of the Pacific Plate 50 million years ago can be determined by moving it such that a 50-million-year-old volcano in the hot-spot trail sits at the location of Hawaii today. However, because the ocean basins really are short-lived features on geologic time scales, reconstructing the world’s geography by backtracking along the hot-spot trail works only for the last 5 percent or so of geologic time. 
 
1.	The author mentions “spreading ridges”, “subduction zones”, and “transform faults” in order to 
A)	illustrate that the boundaries of tectonic plates are neat, thin lines 
B)	explain why some tectonic plates carry islands or continents while others form the seafloor 
C)	explain the complex nature of the edges of tectonic plates 
D)	provide examples of areas of tectonic plates where little geologic action occurs 
 
2.	The word “converge” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	expand 
B)	form 
C)	rise 
D)	move closer 
 
3.	Which of the following sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Volcanic activity is responsible for the formation of the Pacific seafloor in the interior of the Pacific Plate. 
B)	Many volcanoes in the Pacific Ocean are no longer active and have become islands that support coral. 
C)	There are many islands in the Pacific Ocean that originated as volcanoes in the interior of the Pacific Plate 
D)	The map of the Pacific Ocean reveals fewer volcanic islands than there truly are because many are no longer active and some are completely overgrown with coral. 
 
4.	The word “instructive” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	clear 
B)	detailed    C) informative 
   D) familiar 
 
5.	The word “eroded” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	worn down 
B)	scattered    C) developed 
   D) deserted 
 
6.	According to paragraph 3, what is the relationship between the scientific contributions of James Daly and Tuzo Wilson? 
A)	Wilson provided an explanation for the observations made by Daly. 
B)	Wilson challenged the theory proposed by Daly. 
C)	Wilson found numerous examples of island chains that supported Daly’s theory. 
D)	Wilson popularized the explanation of volcanic island formation formulated by Daly. 
 
7.	Why does the author provide the information that “the dating of lavas in the Hawaiian (and other) chains showed that their ages increase away from the presently active volcano”? 
A)	To point out differences between the Hawaiian Island chain and other volcanic island chains 
B)	To question the idea that all the islands in an island chain have been formed by volcanic activity 
C)	To explain why Wilson’s hypothesis was initially difficult to accept 
D)	To provide evidence in support of Daly’s and Wilson’s ideas about how the 
Hawaiian Islands were formed 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true of mantle plumes?    A) They exist close to the surface of tectonic plates. 
B)	They cause most of the volcanic activity that occurs in the interiors of plates. 
C)	They are rarely active for long periods of time. 
D)	They get increasingly older away from the present hot spots. 
 
9.	According to paragraph 5, volcanic islands help geologists to  
A)	reconstruct past geography 
B)	detect changes in mantle plumes 
C)	measure the rigidity of tectonic plates 
D)	explain why the seafloor spreads 
 
10.	What can be inferred about the Pacific Plate from paragraph 5? 
A)	The hot spots on the Pacific Plate are much older than the ones located on other tectonic plates. 
B)	Most of the volcanic sources beneath the Pacific Plate have become extinct. 
C)	The Pacific Plate has moved a distance equal to the length of the Hawaiian Island chain in the past 80 million years. 
D)	The Pacific Plate is located above fewer mantle plumes than other plates are. 
 
11.	The word “current” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	original 
B)	ideal 
C)	relative 
D)	present 
 
12.	According to paragraph 5, why are geologists unable to trace back the entire geologic history of continents from hot-spot trails? 
A)	Hot spots have existed for only about 5 percent of geologic time. 
B)	Hawaii did not exist 50 million years ago. 
C)	Oceanic basins that contained old hot-spot trails disappeared a long time ago. 
D)	Hot-spot trails can be reconstructed only for island chains. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   This pattern remained unexplained for a long time. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   Although volcanic activity is concentrated on the edges of tectonic plates, such activity can occur in the interiors of plates as well. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Our understanding of volcanic islands comes from Daly’s and Wilson’s observations of the Hawaiian Islands, which was later confirmed by plate-tectonic theory. 
B)	Volcanic island chains such as the Hawaiian Islands form in the interior of a tectonic plate as the plate moves over a fixed volcanic source in the mantle. 
C)	It has only recently been discovered that tectonic plates are closely fitting rather than loosely constructed, as geologists previously believed. 
D)	Whereas volcanic islands formed by mantle plumes are typically small, most of the world’s largest islands are formed at the edges of tectonic plates. 
E)	The hot-spot trails formed by volcanic island chains indicate the positions of tectonic plates as far back as the present ocean basins have existed. 
F)	The Pacific Plate has existed for as long as the Hawaiian Islands have existed, namely for more than 80 million years. 
 
 
 
????: 1. C  2. D  3. C  4. C  5. A  6. A  7. D  8. B  9. A  10. C 
 
12. D  12. C  13. D  14. A, B, E 
 
 
 
Predator-Prey Cycles 
 
     How do predators affect populations of the prey animals? The answer is not as simple as might be thought. Moose reached Isle Royale in Lake Superior by crossing over winter ice and multiplied freely there in isolation without predators. When wolves later reached the island, naturalists widely assumed that the wolves would play a key role in controlling the moose population. Careful studies have demonstrated, however, that this is not the case. The wolves eat mostly old or diseased animals that would not survive long anyway. In general, the moose population is controlled by food availability, disease, and other factors rather than by the wolves. 
 
     When experimental populations are set up under simple laboratory conditions, the predator often exterminates its prey and then becomes extinct itself, having nothing left to eat. However, if safe areas like those prey animals have in the wild are provided, the prey population drop to low levels but not to extinction. Low prey population levels then provide inadequate food for the predators, causing the predator population to decrease. When this occurs, the prey population can rebound. In this situation the predator and prey populations may continue in this cyclical pattern for some time. 
 
     Population cycles are characteristic of some species of small mammals, and they sometimes appear to be brought about by predators. Ecologists studying hare populations have found that the North American snowshoe hare follows a roughly ten-year cycle. Its numbers fall tenfold to thirtyfold in a typical cycle, and a hundredfold change can occur. Two factors appear to be generating the cycle: food plants and predators. 
 
     The preferred foods of snowshoe hares are willow and birch twigs. As hare density increases, the quantity of these twigs decreases, forcing the hares to feed on low-quality, high-fiber food. Lower birth rates, low juvenile survivorship, and low growth rates follow, so there is a corresponding decline in hare abundance. Once the hare population has declined, it takes two to three years for the quantity of twigs to recover. 
 
     A key predator of the snowshoe hare is the Canada lynx. The Canada lynx shows a ten-year cycle of abundance that parallels the abundance cycle of hares. As hare numbers increase, lynx numbers do too, rising in response to the increased availability of lynx food. When hare numbers fall, so do lynx numbers, as their food supply is depleted. 
 
     What causes the predator-prey oscillations? Do increasing numbers of hares lead to overharvesting of plants, which in turn results in reduced hare populations, or do increasing numbers of lynx lead to overharvesting of hares? Field experiments carried out by Charles Krebs and coworkers in 1992 provide an answer. Krebs investigated experimental plots in Canada’s Yukon territory that contained hare populations. When food was added to these plots (no food effect) and predators were excluded (no predator effect) from an experimental area, hare numbers increased tenfold and stayed there—the cycle was lost. However, the cycle was retained if either of the factors was allowed to operate alone: if predators were excluded but food was not added (food effect alone), or if food was added in the presence of predators (predator effect alone). Thus, both factors can affect the cycle, which, in practice, seems to be generated by the conjunction of the two factors. 
 
     Predators are an essential factor in maintaining communities that are rich and diverse in species. Without predators, the species that is the best competitor for food, shelter, nesting sites, and other environmental resources tends to dominate and exclude the species with which it competes. ? This phenomenon is known as “competitor exclusion.” ? However, if the community contains a predator of the strongest competitor species, then the population of that competitor is controlled. ? Thus even the less competitive species are able to survive. ? For example, sea stars prey on a variety of bivalve mollusks and prevent these bivalves from monopolizing habitats on the sea floor. This opens up space for many other organisms. When sea stars are removed, species diversity falls sharply. Therefore, from the standpoint of diversity, it is usually a mistake to eliminate a major predator from a community. 
 
1.	In paragraph 1, why does the author discuss the moose and wolves on Isle Royale? 
A)	To provide an example of predators moving to new habitats by following migrating prey 
B)	To show that the interactions between predator populations and prey populations are not always what might be expected 
C)	To suggest that prey populations are more influenced by predation than food availability and disease 
D)	To argue that studies of geographically isolated populations tend not to be useful to naturalists 
 
2.	The word “rebound” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	escape 
B)	recover 
C)	survive 
D)	resist 
 
3.	Paragraph 2 implies which of the following about experimental environments in which predators become extinct? 
A)	They may yield results that do not accurately predict changes of populations in the wild. 
B)	In these environments, the prey species is better adapted than the predator species. 
C)	These environments are appropriate only for studying small populations of predators and prey. 
D)	They are unrealistic because some predators are also the prey of other predators. 
 
4.	Which of the following can be inferred from paragraphs 2 and 3 about the small mammals that experience population cycles? 
A)	Their population cycles are not affected by predators. 
B)	Their predators’ populations periodically disappear. 
C)	They typically undergo ten-year cycles. 
            D)   They have access to places safe from predators. 
 
5.	The word “roughly” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	usually 
B)	repeating 
C)	approximately 
D)	observable 
 
6.	The word “generating” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	producing 
B)	changing    
C)   speeding up 
D)   smoothing out 
 
7.	According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true of the food of snowshoe hares EXCEPT: 
A)	The preferred food for hares consists of willow and birch twigs. 
B)	High fiber food is the most nutritious for hares. 
C)	Depletion of the supply of willow and birch twigs causes low birth and growth rates. 
D)	The food supply takes two or three years to recover after a peak in hare population density. 
 
8.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following statements best characterizes the abundance cycle of the Canada lynx? 
A)	It closely follows the cycle of the snowshoe hare. 
B)	When the numbers of lynx fall, the numbers of snowshoe hares soon decrease. 
C)	When hare numbers decrease, lynx numbers increase. 
D)	It is not clearly related to the availability of lynx food. 
 
9.	The word “conjunction” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	determination 
B)	combination 
C)	alternation 
D)	transformation 
 
10.	According to paragraph 6, which of the following was true of the hare population cycle in Krebs’s experiment? 
A)	The effects of providing food while at the same time introducing predators cancelled each other, so there was no cycle. 
B)	The cycle existed when either the food supply was limited or there were predators. 
C)	There was a cycle when there were no predators and food was supplied. 
D)	If the hares had places to hide from the lynx, the hare population increased tenfold and then remained at that level. 
 
11.	According to paragraph 7, which of the following statements correctly characterizes the effect of sea stars on the ecosystem in which they are predators of bivalves? 
A)	Bivalve populations are kept low, allowing species that compete with bivalves to survive. 
B)	The numbers of most species of bivalves are greatly reduced, leaving the bivalve species that is the strongest competitor to dominate among the survivors. 
C)	Biological diversity begins to decrease because many bivalve species disappear. 
D)	Sea stars dominate at first but then die off because of the depleted food supply. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 7,which of the following is true of the phenomenon of competitor exclusion? 
A)	It results in more diverse communities. 
B)	It requires the presence of predators. 
C)	It affects all competitors equally. 
D)	It happens only when there is a dominant competitor. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
   As a result, there are not enough of the strong competitors to monopolize the environment’s resources. 
 
   Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
   The relationships between predators and prey are complex. 
 
   Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Studies of the interactions between wolves and moose on Isle Royale in Lake Superior reveal that wolf predation is not the primary factor controlling the moose population. 
B)	In predator-prey population cycles, predator populations increase or decrease following similar population changes in the species they prey on. 
C)	Ecologists are interested in studying predator-prey population cycles because understanding how predators and prey interact will allow better wildlife management programs. 
D)	A species’ population tends to rise and falls in a cyclic pattern if the food supply for the population is limited, or if the population has a major predator. 
E)	Predators help maintain biological diversity by limiting populations of a dominant competitor species, thereby preventing that species from excluding others. 
F)	The removal of sea stars reduces the diversity of the community in which they are predators, and is therefore a bad idea. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. B  2. B  3. A  4. D  5. C  6. A  7. B  8. A  9. B  10. B 
 
         11. A  12. D  13. C  14. B, D, E 
 
 
 
TPO 29 
 
Groundwater 
 
    Most of the world’s potable water – freshwater suitable for drinking – is accounted for by groundwater, which is stored in the pores and fractures in rocks. There is more than 50 times as much freshwater stored underground than in all the freshwater rivers and lakes at the surface. Nearly 50 percent of all groundwater is stored in the upper 1,000 meters of Earth. At greater depth within Earth, the pressure of the overlying rock causes pores and cracks to close, reducing the space that pore water can occupy, and almost complete closure occurs at a depth of about 10 kilometers. The greatest water storage, therefore, lies near the surface. 
 
    Aquifers, Porosity, and Permeability 
 
    Groundwater is stored in a variety of rocks types. A groundwater reservoir from which water can be extracted is called an aquifer. We can effectively think of an aquifer as a deposit of water. Extraction of water depends on two properties of the aquifer porosity and permeability. Between sediment grains are spaces that can be filled with water. This pore space is known as porosity and is expressed as a percentage of the total rock volume. Porosity is important for water-storage capacity, but for water to flow through rocks, the pore spaces must be connected. The ability of water, or other fluids, to flow through the interconnected pore spaces in rocks is termed permeability. Fractures and joints have very high permeability. In the intergranular spaces of rocks, however, fluid must flow around and between grains in a tortuous path; this winding path causes a resistance to flow. The rate at which the flowing water overcomes this resistance is related to the permeability of rock. 
 
sediment: materials (such as sand or small rocks) that are deposited by water, wind, or glacial ice. 
 
    Sediment sorting and compaction influence permeability and porosity. The more poorly sorted or the more tightly compacted a sediment is, the lower its porosity and permeability. Sedimentary rocks – the most common rock type near the surface – are also the most common reservoirs for water because they contain the most space that can be filled with water. Sandstones generally make good aquifers, while finer-grained mudstones are typically impermeable. Impermeable rocks are referred to as aquicludes. Igneous and metamorphic rocks are more compact, commonly crystalline, and rarely contain spaces between grains. However, even igneous and metamorphic rocks may act as groundwater reservoirs if extensive fracturing occurs in such rocks and if the fracture system is interconnected. 
 
    The Water Table 
 
    The water table is the underground boundary below which all the cracks and pores are filled with water. In some cases, the water table reaches Earth’s surface, where it is expressed as rivers, lakes, and marshes. ? Typically, though, the water table may be tens or hundreds of meters below the surface. ? The water table is not flat but usually follows the contours of the topography. ? Above the water table is the vadose zone, through which rainwater percolates. ? Water in the vadose zone drains down to the water table, leaving behind a thin coating of water on mineral grains. The vadose zone supplies plant roots near the surface with water. 
 
topography: the shape or a surface such as Earth’s, including the rise and fall of such features as mountains and valleys 
 
    Because the surface of the water table is not flat but instead rises and falls with topography, groundwater is affected by gravity in the same fashion as surface water. Groundwater flows downhill to topographic lows. If the water table intersects the land surface, groundwater will flow out onto the surface at springs, either to be collected there or to subsequently flow farther along a drainage. Groundwater commonly collects in stream drainages but may remain entirely beneath the surface of dry stream-beds in arid regions. In particularly wet years, short stretches of an otherwise dry stream-bed may have flowing water because the water table rises to intersect the land surface. 
 
1.	In paragraph 1, why does the author mention “the pressure of the overlying rock”? 
A)	To show how water can be forced deep under Earth’s surface 
B)	To show why groundwater is more plentiful than surface freshwater 
C)	To correct a commonly made error about the location of groundwater 
D)	To explain why most groundwater lies near Earth’s surface 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, groundwater differs from the water in rivers and lakes in terms of its 
A)	potability 
B)	usefulness 
C)	abundance 
D)	cost 
 
3.	The word “extracted” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	used 
B)	poured 
C)	removed 
D)	kept out 
 
4.	The word “termed” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	considered 
B)	called 
C)	limited to 
D)	caused by 
 
5.	According to paragraph 2, what does porosity determine? 
A)	The rate at which the aquifer’s water overcomes resistance to flow 
B)	The amount of water that the aquifer can hold 
C)	The likelihood that fractures and joints will occur in the aquifer 
D)	The depth underground at which the aquifer lies 
 
6.	The word “compact” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	hard 
B)	compressed 
C)	heavy 
D)	deeply buried 
 
7.	According to paragraph 3, when can igneous rock serve as an aquifer? 
A)	When it has many connected fractures B) When it lies next to metamorphic rock 
C)	When it lies relatively near the surface 
D)	When it is crystalline 
 
8.	According to paragraph 2, what is the relationship between permeability and porosity? 
A)	The more pores a rock has, the higher its porosity but the lower its permeability. 
B)	Rocks with many internal spaces that are not connected with each other will have high porosity but low permeability. 
C)	If water flows through a rock easily, it has high permeability but low porosity. 
D)	Rocks that have high permeability have high porosity and vice versa. 
 
9.	The word “coating” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	stream 
B)	barrier 
C) amount 
D) layer 
 
10.	Paragraph 4 implies which of the following about roots of plants? 
A) They prevent water from reaching the vadose zone. 
B)	They mark the boundary between the vadose zone and the water table. 
C)	They do not typically get their water from the water table. 
D)	They help keep the water table from dropping farther. 
 
11.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Groundwater only flows out of the ground if the water table intersects the land surface. 
B)	If the land surface and the water table intersect, groundwater can flow underground. 
C)	Groundwater maybe drained if springs occur where the water table intersects the land surface. 
D)	Where the water table meets the land surface, groundwater flows out through surface springs. 
 
12.	Paragraph 5 implies which of the following about the level of the water table? 
A) It may rise or fall from year to year, depending on annual rainfall. 
B)	It does not vary in arid regions. 
C)	It rarely intersects the land surface of most regions. 
D)	It is unrelated to the rate at which groundwater flows. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
  This is a consequence of the slow rate of movement of the groundwater, which often prevents the water table from attaining a flat (horizontal) level. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Most of the world’s potable water is stored as groundwater in the pores and fractures of underground rock, much of it at depths of less than 1,000 meters. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Sedimentary rock may make poor aquifers because of tightly compacted sediment, which reduces porosity and permeability. 
B)	Groundwater reservoirs are characterized by the porosity and permeability of the rock in which they lie, and these factors vary according to the type of rock. 
C)	Porosity is a measure of the empty space within rock, while permeability measures the degree to which water can flow freely through rock. 
D)	Although the water table usually follows the contours of the land surface, its level may vary from year to year and may intersect the surface in places. 
E)	The vadose zone is typically dry because water does not stay in it, but instead percolates down to aquifers below or drains out through springs and streams. 
F)	In arid regions, the water tables remain at a constant level far below the surface, preventing stream-beds from filling up even during wet years. ????:  1. D  2. C  3. C  4. B  5. B  6. B  7. A  8. B  9. D  10. C 
 
         11. D  12. A  13. C  14. B, C, D 
 	  
Early Saharan Pastoralists 
 
    The Sahara is a highly diverse, albeit dry, region that has undergone major climatic changes since 10,000 B.C. As recently as 6000 B.C., the southern frontier of the desert was far to the north of where it is now, while semiarid grassland and shallow freshwater lakes covered much of what are now arid plains. This was a landscape where antelope of all kinds abounded – along with Bos primigenius, a kind of oxen that has become extinct. The areas that are now desert were, like all arid regions, very susceptible to cycles of higher and lower levels of rainfall, resulting in major, sudden changes in distributions of plants and animals. The people who hunted the sparse desert animals responded to drought by managing the wild resources they hunted and gathered, especially wild oxen, which had to have regular water supplies to survive. 
 
    Even before the drought, the Sahara was never well watered. Both humans and animals were constantly on the move, in search of food and reliable water supplies. Under these circumstances, archaeologist Andrew Smith believes, the small herds of Bos primigenius in the desert became smaller, more closely knit breeding units as the drought took hold. The beasts were more disciplined, so that it was easier for hunters to predict their habits, and capture animals at will. At the same time, both cattle and humans were more confined in their movements, staying much closer to permanent water supplies for long periods of time. As a result, cattle and humans came into close association. 
 
    Smith believes that the hunters were well aware of the more disciplined ways in which their prey behaved. ? Instead of following the cattle on their annual migrations, the hunters began to prevent the herd from moving from one spot to another. ? At first, they controlled the movement of the herd while ensuring continuance of their meat diet. ? But soon they also gained genetic control of the animals, which led to rapid physical changes in the herd. ? South African farmers who maintain herds of wild eland (large African antelopes with short, twisted horns) report that the offspring soon diminish in size, unless wild bulls are introduced constantly from outside. The same effects of inbreeding may have occurred in controlled cattle populations, with some additional, and perhaps unrecognized, advantages. The newly domesticated animals behaved better, were easier to control, and may have enjoyed a higher birth rate, which in turn yielded greater milk supplies. We know from rock paintings deep in the Sahara that the herders were soon selecting breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide colors. 
 
    It is still unclear whether domesticated cattle were tamed independently in northern Africa or introduced to the continent from Southwest Asia. Whatever the source of the original tamed herds might have been, it seems entirely likely that much the same process of juxtaposition (living side by side) and control occurred in both Southwest Asia and northern Africa, and even in Europe, among peoples who had an intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle. The experiments with domestication probably occurred in many places, as people living in ever-drier environments cast around for more predictable food supplies. 
 
    The cattle herders had only a few possessions: unsophisticated pots and polished adzes. They also hunted with bow and arrow. The Saharan people left a remarkable record of their lives painted on the walls of caves deep in the desert. Their artistic endeavors have been preserved in paintings of wild animals, cattle, goats, humans, and scenes of daily life that extend back perhaps to 5000 B.C. The widespread distribution of pastoral sites of this period suggests that the Saharans ranged their herds over widely separated summer and winter grazing grounds. 
 
adzes: cutting tools with blades set at right angles to the handle 
 
    About 3500 B.C., climatic conditions again deteriorated. The Sahara slowly became drier and lakes vanished. On the other hand, rainfall increased in the interior of western Africa, and the northern limit of the tsetse fly, an insect fatal to cattle, moved south. So the herders shifted south, following the major river systems into savanna regions. By this time, the Saharan people were probably using domestic crops, experimenting with such summer rainfall crops as sorghum and millet as they moved out of areas where they could grow wheat, barley, and other Mediterranean crops. 
 
1.	According to paragraph 1, what was true of the Sahara region around 6000 B.C.? A) Much less of it was desert than is now the case. 
B)	Most areas that are now grassland were covered by shallow lakes. 
C)	It had just undergone a major climatic change. 
D)	Wild oxen and antelopes lived in separate parts of the region. 
 
2.	The word “albeit” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	usually 
B)	almost 
C)	though 
D)	rather 
 
3.	According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of all arid regions? A) They include at least some freshwater lakes. 
B)	They have similar distributions of plants and animals. 
C)	They are greatly affected by changes in the amount of rain they receive. 
D)	They have frequent droughts that make it difficult to manage the wild resources. 
 
4.	Paragraph 2 supports which of the following ideas about wild oxen in the Sahara region after the drought took hold? A) They traveled in smaller herds. 
B)	They were harder for hunters to capture. 
C)	They tended to be significantly smaller in size. 
D)	They moved along less predictable routes. 
 
5.	According to paragraph 2, what was it that brought cattle and humans into close association? 
A)	The development of smaller breeding units within herds 
B)	Cattle and humans staying close to permanent water supplies for long periods of time 
C)	The development of greater discipline among cattle 
D)	Cattle and humans constantly on the move searching for food and reliable water supplies 
 
6.	Why does the author mention the “rock paintings deep in the Sahara”? 
A)	To help explain why the hunters wanted to control the herds 
B)	To provide support for the idea that the herders soon gained genetic control of the cattle 
C)	To show that the herders had artistic as well as practical abilities 
D)	To argue that the herders soon began to value their cattle for more than food 
 
7.	According to paragraph 3, all of the following statements were true of newly domesticated animals EXCEPT: 
A)	They were controlled more easily by the farmers. 
B)	They produced a larger number of offspring. 
C)	They produced more milk. 
D)	They were larger in size. 
 
8.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Regardless of where the first tamed herds came from, people tried to control them by living in juxtaposition with them. 
B)	Regardless of where the first tamed herds came from, they resulted from the same process of juxtaposition and control by people who understood the behavior of wild cattle. 
C)	People who had an intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle moved closer together to cooperate in taming the herd, regardless of where they found them. 
D)	The process of taming herds was certainly the same in Southwest Asia, northern Africa, and Europe because people know a lot about the behavior of wild cattle, regardless of where they lived. 
 
9.	According to paragraph 5, each of the following was true about the early Saharan people EXCEPT: 
A)	They had few possessions apart from cattle. 
B)	After about 5000 B.C., they lived primarily in caves that were located deep in the desert. 
C)	Between the summer and winter seasons, they moved their herds over long distances. 
D)	They painted animals and scenes of daily life on the walls of caves. 
 
10.	The word “endeavors” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	methods 
B)	styles 
C)	scenes 
D)	efforts 
 
11.	The word “deteriorated” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	became unstable 
B)	caused hardship 
C)	changed completely 
D)	got worse 
 
12.	According to paragraph 6, what allowed the herders to shift south into the savanna regions after about 3500 B.C.? 
A)	They could easily grow Mediterranean crops in those regions. 
B)	They could more easily domesticate sorghum and millet in those regions. 
C)	The tsetse fly was no longer a problem in those regions. 
D)	The river systems in those regions provided reliable sources of water in the summer. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
This knowledge enabled the hunters to adopt a different approach to hunting. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
As recently as 6000 B.C., much of the Sahara region was semiarid grassland where humans hunted wild oxen and antelope. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	There was enough freshwater for Saharan peoples to move freely throughout the region without having to manage the resources they hunted and gathered. 
B)	When the drying climate forced cattle and humans close to each other in areas 
with water supplies, humans gained control over the cattle and eventually domesticated them. 
C)	Once Saharans controlled the breeding of their cattle, the characteristics of the cattle changed rapidly, increasing their reproductive rates and milk production. 
D)	Herders soon began selecting breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide colors, although the advantages of controlled inbreeding were not apparent to them at first. 
E)	Although the Saharan peoples were remarkably sophisticated artists, they had only a few simple possessions, like adzes and the bows and arrows they used for hunting. 
F)	As the drought worsened around3500 B.C. and conditions for herders became more favorable to the south, the Saharan people moved into savanna regions, where they grew different crops. ????:  1. A  2. C  3. C  4. A  5. B  6. B  7. D  8. B  9. B  10. 
D 
 
        11. D  12. C  13. A  14. B, C, F 
  
Buck Rubs and Buck Scrapes 
 
    A conspicuous sign indicating the presence of white-tailed deer in a woodlot is a buck rub. ? A male deer makes a buck rub by stripping the bark (outer layer) of a small tree with its antlers. ? When completed, the buck rub is an obvious visual signal to us and presumably to other deer in the area. ? A rub is usually located at the shoulder height of a deer (one meter or less about the ground) on a smooth-barked, small-diameter (16 – 25 millimeters) tree. ? The smooth bark of small red maples makes this species ideals for buck rubs in the forests of the mid-eastern United States. 
 
    Adult male deer usually produce rubs in late summer or early autumn when the outer velvet layer is being shed from their antlers. Rubs are created about one to two months before the breeding season (the rut). Hence for a long time biologists believed that male deer used buck rubs not only to clean and polish antlers but also to provide practice for the ensuing male-to-male combat during the rut. However, biologists also noted that deer sniff and lick an unfamiliar rub, which suggests that this visual mark on a small tree plays an important communication purpose in the social life of deer. 
 
    Buck rubs also have a scent produced by lands in the foreheads of deer that is transferred to the tree when the rub is made. These odors make buck rubs an important means of olfactory communication between deer. The importance of olfactory communication (using odors to communicate) in the way of life of deer was documented by a study of captive adult mule deer a few decades ago, which noted that males rubbed their foreheads on branches and twigs, especially as autumn approached. A decade later another study reported that adult male white-tailed deer exhibited forehead rubbing just before and during the rut. It was found that when a white-tailed buck makes a rub, it moves both antlers and forehead glands along the small tree in a vertical direction. This forehead rubbing behavior coincides with a high level of glandular activity in the modified scent glands found on the foreheads of male deer; the glandular activity causes the forehead pelage (hairy covering) of adult males to be distinctly darker than in females or younger males. 
 
    Forehead rubbing by male deer on buck rubs presumably sends a great deal of information to other members of the same species. First, the chemicals deposited on the rub provide information on the individual identity of an animal; no two mammals produce the same scent. For instance, as we all know, dogs recognize each other via smell. Second, because only male deer rub, the buck rub and its associated chemicals indicate the sex of the deer producing the rub. Third, older, more dominant bucks produce more buck rubs and probably deposit more glandular secretions on a given rub. Thus, the presence of many well-marked rubs is indicative of older, higher-status males being in the general vicinity rather than simply being a measure of relative deer abundance in a given area. The information conveyed by the olfactory signals on a buck rub make it the social equivalent of some auditory signals in other deer species, such as trumpeting by bull elk. 
 
    Because both sexes of whitetails respond to buck rubs by smelling and licking them, rubs may serve a very important additional function. Fresher buck rubs (less than two days old), in particular, are visited more frequently by adult females than older rubs. In view of this behavior it has been suggested that chemicals present in fresh buck rubs may help physiologically induce and synchronize fertility in females that visit these rubs. This would be an obvious advantage to wide-ranging deer, especially to a socially dominant buck when courting several adult females during the autumn rut. 
 
    Another visual signal produced by while-tailed deer is termed a buck scrape. Scrapes consist of a clearing (about 0.5 meter in diameter) and shallow depression made by pushing aside the leaves covering the ground; after making the scrape, the deer typically urinates in the depression. Thus, like a buck rub, a scrape is both a visual and an olfactory signal. Buck scrapes are generally created after leaf-fall in autumn, which is just before or during the rut. Scrapes are usually placed in open or conspicuous places, such as along a deer trail. Most are made by older males, although females and younger males (2.5 years old or less) occasionally make scrapes. 
 
1.	The word “conspicuous” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	noticeable 
B)	common 
C)	strange 
D)	particular 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, why are small red maple trees ideal for buck rubs? A) They have smooth bark. 
B)	They are found in the mid-eastern United States. 
C)	They grow very slowly. 
D)	They tend to grow in open spaces. 
 
3.	The studies of forehead rubbing by deer described in paragraph 3 showed that 
A)	forehead rubbing encourages the growth of antlers 
B)	mule deer and white-tailed deer behave differently during the rut 
C)	the rut can occur at different times of the year 
D)	deer convey important information through scent 
 
4.	The word “exhibited” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	relied on 
B)	increased 
C)	displayed 
D)	preferred 
 
5.	Why does the author mention that “dogs recognize each other via smell”? 
A)	To point out the similarities between dogs and deer 
B)	To argue that animals communicate through scent rather than through vision 
C)	To support the claim that the scent of a buck rub serves to identify its maker to other deer 
D)	To suggest that buck rubs can be detected by other species 
 
6.	The word “crude” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	rough 
B)	useful C) necessary 
D) obvious 
 
7.	What can be inferred from paragreaph 4 about the trumpeting of bull elk? 
A)	Trumpeting by higher-status bull elk signals their presence to other members of their species. 
B)	Bull elk need to combine trumpeting with olfactory signals to convey information about their identity. 
C)	Turmpeting alerts white-tailed deer to the presence of bull elk in their vicinity. 
D)	Trumpeting provides a better measure of deer presence in a given area than buck rubs do. 
 
8.	According to paragraph 4, the buck rubs occurring in a given area reveal all of the following information about deer EXCEPT 
A)	the individual identity of the deer 
B) the gender of the deer 
C)	the likely social status of the deer 
D)	the number of deer in the vicinity 
 
9.	The word “induce” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	increase 
B)	extend 
C)	delay 
D)	stimulate 
 
10.	According to paragraph 5, which of the following is true about chemicals in buck rubs? 
A)	They have to be at least two days old for females to be able to detect them. 
B)	They are more effective in older buck rubs than in fresher ones. 
C)	They may affect fertility in female deer. 
D)	They can be more easily detected by young males than adult females. 
 
11.	The word “termed” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A) associated with 
B)	visible as 
C)	known as 
D)	porvided by 
 
12.	According to the passage, in what way do buck scrapes differ from buck rubs? 
A) Bick scrapes are made by both male and female deer. 
B)	Buck scrapes are purely visual signals. 
C)	Buck scrapes are made closer to the breeding season than buck rubs. 
D)	Buck scrapes can be smelled only by deer. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
This process can take a few hours to several days. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Buck rubs and buck scrapes are two types of markings made by white-tailed deer. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The observation that deer sniff and lick buck rubs first led scientists to connect buck rubs with combat between adult males during the breeding season. 
B)	As they rub the bark from trees, male deer leave behind chemicals produced by the glands in their foreheads, creating a scent that other deer can detect. 
C)	Buck rubs and buck scrapes are visual signals and smells that deer use to communicate a viariety of information to other deer. 
D)	The height of a buck rub, the type of tree used, and the direction in which the deer applies the rub can give different kinds of information to other deer. 
E)	The number of buck rubs and buck scrapes in a given area changes as the density of the population of male deer in the area changes. 
F)	Buck rubs are created close to the breeding season of deer and may affect the timing of fertility in the female deer that visit the rubs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????:  1. A  2. A  3. D  4. C  5. C  6. A  7. A  8. D  9. D  10. 
C 
 
11. C  12. C  13. A  14. B, C, F 
 
 
TPO 29 
 
Characteristics of Roman Pottery 
 
    The pottery of ancient Romans is remarkable in several ways. The high quality of Roman pottery is very easy to appreciate when handling actual pieces of tableware or indeed kitchenware and amphorae (the large jars used throughout the Mediterranean for the transport and storage of liquids, such as wine and oil). However, it is impossible to do justice to Roman wares on the page, even when words can be backed up by photographs and drawings. Most Roman pottery is light and smooth to the touch and very tough, although, like all pottery, it shatters if dropped on a hard surface. It is generally made with carefully selected and purified clay, worded to thin-walled and standardized shapes on a fast wheel and fired in a kiln (pottery oven) capable of ensuring a consistent finish. With handmade pottery, inevitably there are slight differences between individual vessels of the same design and occasional minor blemishes (flaws). But what strikes the eye and the touch most immediately and most powerfully with Roman pottery is its consistent high quality. 
 
    This is not just an aesthetic consideration but also a practical one. These vessels are solid (brittle, but not fragile), they are pleasant and easy to handle (being light and smooth), and, with their hard and sometimes glossy (smooth and shiny) surfaces, they hold liquids well and are easy to wash. Furthermore, their regular and standardized shapes would have made them simple to stack and store. When people today are shown a very ordinary Roman pot and, in particular, are allowed to handle it, they often comment on how modern it looks and feels, and they need to be convinced of is true age. 
 
    As impressive as the quality of Roman pottery is its sheer massive quantity. 
When considering quantities, we would ideally like to have some estimates for overall production from particular sites of pottery manufacture and for overall consumption at specific settlements. Unfortunately, it is in the nature of the archaeological evidence, which is almost invariably only a sample of what once existed, that such figures will always be elusive. However, no one who has ever worked in the field would question the abundance of Roman pottery, particularly in the Mediterranean region. This abundance is notable in Roman settlements (especially urban sites) where the labor that archaeologists have to put into the washing and sorting of potsherds (fragments of pottery) constitutes a high proportion of the total work during the initial phases of excavation. 
 
    ? Only rarely can we derive any “real” quantities from deposits of broken pots. ? However, there is one exceptional dump, which does represent a very large part of the site’s total history of consumption and for which an estimate of quantity has been produced. ? On the left bank of the Tiber River in Rome, by one of the river ports of the ancient city, is a substantial hill some 50 meters high called Monte Testaccio. ? It is made up entirely of broken oil amphorae, mainly of the second and third centuries A.D. It has been estimated that Monte Testaccio contains the remains of some 53 million amphorae, in which around 6,000 million liters of oil were imported into the city from overseas. Imports inot imperial Rome were supported by the full might of the state and were therefore quite exceptional – but the size of the operations at Monte Testaccio, and the productivity and complexity that lay behind them, nonetheless cannot fail to impress. This was a society with similarities to modern ones – moving goods on a gigantic scale, manufacturing high-quality containers to do so, and occasionally, as here, even discarding them on delivery. 
 
    Roman pottery was transported not only in large quantities but also over substantial distances. Many Roman pots, in particular amphorae and the fine wares designed for use at tables, could travel hundreds of miles – all over the Mediterranean and also further afield. But maps that show the various spots where Roman pottery of a particular type has been found tell only part of the story. What is more significant than any geographical spread is the access that different levels of society had to good-quality products. In all but the remotest regions of the empire, Roman pottery of a high standard is common at the sites of humble villages and isolated farmsteads. 
 
1.	Paragraph 1 indicates which of the following about Roman pottery? 
A)	Roman amphorae were of much higher quality overall than other Roman pottery. 
B)	Roman pottery can best be appreciated when actual pieces are handled. 
C)	Roman pottery declined slightly in quality when the use of fast wheels and kilns was introduced. 
D)	Roman practical tableware spread more rapidly across the Mediterranean than amphorae did. 
 
2.	All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as characteristics of Roman pottery EXCEPT: 
A)	It was usually made with high-quality clay. 
B)	It generally did not weigh much. 
C)	It did not break as easily as other ancient pottery. 
D)	It sometimes had imperfections. 
 
3.	According to paragraph 2, which of the following is NOT true of Roman vessels? 
A) They were good containers for liquids. 
B)	Their shapes allowed for easy stacking and storing. 
C)	They sometimes had shiny surfaces. 
D)	Their true age is immediately apparent. 
 
4.	The author mentions the work of archaeologists in paragraph 3 in order to
A) support the idea that pottery was produced in large quantities by the Romans 
B)	illustrate how hard it is for archaeologists to find complete pieces of Roman pottery 
C)	contrast archaeological sites in Roman urban areas with other sites in the Mediterranean 
D)	explain why the quantities of pottery found vary significantly from one site to another 
 
5.	The word “substantial” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	protected 
B)	man-made 
C)	large 
D)	famous 
 
6.	According to paragraph 4, Monte Testaccio is particularly important for archaeologists because archaeologists were able to 
A)	conclude how amphorae manufacturing increased rapidly after the second century A.D. 
B)	find the locations where most of the amphorae in the Roman Empire were produced 
C)	obtain relatively accurate calculations of the quantities of amphorae used over time in that place 
D)	discover that the Roman state had supported amphorae production 
 
7.	The word “entirely” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	apparently 
B)	completely 
C)	basically 
D)	mostly 
 
8.	Paragraph 4 indicates which of the following about the port on the Tiber River near Monte Testaccio? 
A)	It was built around the third century A.D. 
B)	It was close to areas where large quantities of oil were produced. 
C)	It was in use only for a very short period of time. 
D)	It had an impressive level of commercial activity. 
 
9.	The statement in paragraph 4 that amphorae delivered to the port near Monte Testaccio were occasionally discarded supports which of the following? 
A) Traders at the port were often careless. 
B)	The quality of the amphorae used at the port was not very good. 
C)	The scale of trade made it possible to waste quality amphorae sometimes. 
D)	The importing of oil from overseas gradually declined, reducing the need for pottery containers. 
 
10.	The statement that maps “show the various spots where Roman pottery of a particular type has been found tell only part of the story” makes the point that 
A)	maps indicate where specific pottery styles have been found, but they do not indicate where these styles originated 
B)	maps show the geographical spread of Roman pottery but not the people who had access to it 
C)	maps do not usually include pottery styles found in the remotest regions of the Roman Empire 
D)	archaeologists studying Roman pottery need to use a range of techniques in their investigations 
 
11.	The word “humble” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)  rural 
B)	distant 
C)	ancient 
D)	modest 
 
12.	The word “particular” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	specific 
B) common 
C)	ancient 
D)	superior 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
That is because residents of a city did not usually discard used pottery at the same site over a long period of time. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
The pottery of the ancient Roman Empire is remarkable. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Roman pottery is considered to be practical and of consistently high quality. 
B)	People are not familiar with the whole range of pottery the Romans created because most of the available pieces represent only a limited number of styles and shapes. 
C)	Even though the exact quantity of pottery produced by the Romans is almost impossible to calculate, it is certain that it was produced in large quantities. 
D)	Archaeologists looking for the remains of Roman pottery concentrate on urban sites because that is where the oldest pieces of kitchenware and amphorae have been found. 
E)	Roman pottery was transported over long distances, and different levels of society had access to quality pottery. 
F)	It is still unclear to archaeologists what the role of the Roman state in the commercial success of Roman pottery was. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. B  2. C  3. D  4. A  5. C  6. C  7. B  8. D  9. C  10. B 
 
         11. D  12. A  13. B  14. A, C, E 
 
Competition 
 
    When several individuals of the same species or of several different species depend on the same limited resource, a situation may arise that is referred to as competition. The existence of competition has been long known to naturalists; its effects were described by Darwin in considerable detail. Competition among individuals of the same species (intraspecies competition), one of the major mechanisms of natural selection, is the concern of evolutionary biology. Competition among the individuals of different species (interspecies competition) is a major concern of ecology. It is one of the factors controlling the size of competing populations, and in extreme cases it may lead to the extinction of one of the competing species. This was described by Darwin for indigenous New Zealand species of animals and plants, which died out when competing species from Europe were introduced. 
 
    No serious competition exists when the major needed resource is in superabundant supply, as in most cases of the coexistence of herbivores (plant eaters). Furthermore, most species do not depend entirely on a single resource. If the major resource for a species becomes scarce, the species can usually shift to alternative resources. If more than one species is competing for a scarce resource, the competing species usually switch to different alternative resources. Competition is usually most severe among close relatives with similar demands on the environment. But it may also occur among totally unrelated forms that compete for the same resource, such as seed-eating rodents and ants. The effects of such competition are graphically demonstrated when all the animals or all the plants in an ecosystem come into competition, as happened 2 million years ago at the end of the Pliocene, when North and South America became joined by the Isthmus of Panama. North and South American species migrating across the Isthmus now came into competition with each other. The result was the extermination of a large fraction of the South American mammals, which were apparently unable to withstand the competition from invading North American species – although added predation was also an important factor. 
 
    To what extent competition determines the composition of a community and the density of particular species has been the source of considerable controversy. The problem is that competition ordinarily cannot be observed directly but must be inferred from the spread or increase of one species and the concurrent reduction or disappearance of another species. The Russian biologist G. F. Gause performed numerous two-species experiments in the laboratory, in which one of the species became extinct when only a single kind of resource was available. On the basis of these experiments and of field observations, the so-called law of competitive exclusion was formulated, according to which no two species can occupy the same niche. Numerous seeming exceptions to this law have since been found, but they can usually be explained as cases in which the two species, even though competing for a major joint resource, did not really occupy exactly the same niche. 
 
    Competition among species is of considerable evolutionary importance. The physical structure of species competing for resources in the same ecological niche tends to gradually evolve in ways that allow them to occupy different niches. Competing species also tend to change their range so that their territories no longer overlap. The evolutionary effect of competition on species has been referred to as “species selection;” however, this description is potentially misleading. Only the individuals of a species are subject to the pressures of natural selection. The effect on the well-being and existence of a species is just the result of the effects of selection on all the individuals of the species. Thus species selection is actually a result of individual selection. 
 
    Competition may occur for any needed resource. ? In the case of animals it is usually food; in the case of forest plants it may be light; in the case of substrate inhabitants it may be space, as in many shallow-water bottom-dwelling marine organisms. ? Indeed, it may be for any of the factors, physical as well as biotic, that are essential for organisms. ? Competition is usually the more severe the denser the population. ? Together with predation, it is the most important density-dependent factor in regulating population growth. 
 
1.	The phrase “mechanisms of natural selection” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	types of natural selection 
B)	dangers of natural selection 
C)	problems natural selection solves 
D)	ways natural selection works 
 
2.	According to paragraph 1, what is one effect of competition among individuals of different species? 
A)	It results in the eventual elimination of the resources for which they are competing. 
B)	It leads to competition among individuals of the same species. 
C)	It encourages new species to immigrate to an area. 
D)	It controls the number of individuals in the competing populations. 
 
3.	The word “indigenous” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	native 
B)	rare 
C)	most 
D)	numerous 
 
4.	In paragraph 1, why does the author mention what happened in New Zealand? 
A)	To indicate that Darwin understood the importance of competition 
B)	To illustrate that competition can lead to the extinction of species 
C)	To identify where the idea of competition among species first arose 
D)	To argue against the idea that the process of selection is a natural occurrence 
 
5.	According to paragraph 2, competition is not usually a significant factor among two coexisting species when 
A)	one of the species has only recently moved into the territory of the other 
B)	the species are closely related to each other 
C)	the population of one species is much larger than that of the other 
D)	both of the species are herbivores 
 
6.	The word “graphically” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	vividly 
B)	frequently 
C)	broadly 
D)	typically 
 
7.	In paragraph 2, why does the author talk about what happened as a result of North and South America becoming joined as the Isthmus of Panama? 
A)	To make the point that predation can have as much effect on species survival as completion does 
B)	To show how the ability to switch to an alternative resource can give a species a competitive advantage 
C)	To account for the current species composition of North and South America 
D)	To provide an example of the serious effects of competition between unrelated species 
 
8.	Paragraph 3 supports the idea that Gause’s experiments were important because they 
A)	provided a situation in which competition could be removed from the interaction between two species 
B)	showed that previous ideas about the extent to which competition determines the composition of a community were completely mistaken 
C)	helped establish that competition will remove all but one species from any given ecological niche 
D)	offered evidence that competition between species is minimal when there is an overabundance of a single food source 
 
9.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Apparent exceptions to this law usually involve cases in which two species compete for the same major resource but occupy slightly different niches. 
B)	Although it may appear that two species always have different niches, many exceptions show that species compete with each other. 
C)	Cases in which two species not only compete for a shared resource but also occupy similar niches are considered exceptions to this law. 
D)	Cases in which the two species do not occupy the same niche yet still compete for the same resource are believed to be exceptions to this law. 
 
10.	According to paragraph 4, how does competition affect evolution? 
A)	It results in the evolution of physical structures that allow the species to compete with each other more effectively. 
B)	It results in the evolutionary extinction of all but one of the competing species. 
C)	It results in the competing species evolving in such a way that they no longer compete for the same resources. 
D)	It results in the competing species evolving to become so much like each other that the competition between them eventually disappears. 
 
11.	According to paragraph 4, “species selection” is a misleading term because it 
A)	overemphasizes the role of selection pressures in species extinction 
B)	suggest that selection pressures directly influence whole species 
C)	does not make a distinction between species extinction and species evolution D) suggests that extinction always results whenever there is competition 
 
12.	The word “regulating” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	controlling 
B)	explaining 
C)	observing 
D)	stopping 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
That is, as the density of a population increases, competition has a greater impact and leads to greater mortality. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
When necessary resources are limited, competition can occur among individuals of the same species or of different species. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Competition can eliminate a species, but since most species do not depend on a single resource, competition is often reduced by switching to alternative resources. 
B)	Experiments and field observations have established that competition between species is strong enough to prevent two species from occupying the same ecological niche. 
C)	Competition between individuals of the same species is usually for food whereas competition between species is usually for habitat. 
D)	Competition between a pair of species tends to lessen over time because the species tend to evolve to occupy different ecological niches and ranges. 
E)	Investigation of the ecological role of competition is difficult because ordinarily the competition cannot be observed directly and must be inferred from its presumed effects. 
F)	Competition is usually strongest when the density of the competing 
populations is the same. 
 
 
????: 1. D  2. D  3. A  4. B  5. D  6. A  7. D  8. C  9. A  10. C 
 
         11. B  12. A  13. D  14. A, B, D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The History of Waterpower 
 
    Moving water was one of the earliest energy sources to be harnessed to reduce the workload of people and animals. No one knows exactly when the waterwheel was invented, but irrigation systems existed at least 5,000 years ago, and it seems probable that the earliest waterpower device was the noria, a waterwheel that raised water for irrigation in attached jars. This device appears to have evolved no later than the fifth century B.C., perhaps independently in different regions of the Middle and Far East. 
 
    The earliest waterpower mills were probably vertical-axis mills for grinding corn, known as Norse or Greek mills, which seem to have appeared during the first or second century B.C. in the Middle East and a few centuries later in Scandinavia. In the following centuries, increasingly sophisticated water power mills were built throughout the Roman Empire and beyond its boundaries in the Middle East and northern Europe. In England, the Saxons are thought to have used both horizontal- and vertical-axis wheels. The first documented English mill was in the eighth century, but three centuries later about 5,000 were recorded, suggesting that every settlement of any size had its mill. 
 
    Raising water and grinding corn were by no means the only uses of waterpower mill, and during the following centuries, the applications of waterpower kept pace with the developing technologies of mining, iron working, paper making, and the wool and cotton industries. Water was the main source of mechanical power, and by the end of the seventeenth century, England alone is though to have had some 20,000 working mills. 
 
    There was much debate on the relative efficiencies of different types of waterwheels. ? The period from about 1650 until 1800 saw some excellent scientific and technical investigations of different designs. ? They revealed output powers ranging from about 1 horsepower to perhaps 60 for the largest wheels and confirmed that for maximum efficiency, the water should pass across the blades as smoothly as possible and fall away with minimum speed, having given up almost all of its kinetic energy. ? (They also proved that, in principle, the overshot wheel, a type of wheel in which an overhead stream of water powers the wheel, should win the efficiency competition.) ? 
 
    But then steam power entered the scene, putting the whole future of waterpower in doubt. An energy analyst writing in the year 1800 would have painted a very pessimistic picture of the future for waterpower. The coal-fired steam engine was taking over, and the waterwheel was fast becoming obsolete. However, like many later experts, this one would have suffered from an inability to see into the future. A century later the picture was completely different by then, the world had an electric industry, and a quarter of its generating capacity was water powered. 
 
    The growth of the electric-power industry was the result of a remarkable series of scientific discoveries and developments in electrotechnology during the nineteenth century, but significant changes in what we might now call hydro (water) technology also played their part. In 1832, the year of Michael Faraday’s discovery that a changing magnetic field produces and electric field, a young French engineer patented a new and more efficient waterwheel. His name was Benoit Fourneyron, and his device was the first successful water turbine. (The word turbine comes from the Latin turbo: something that spins). The waterwheel, unaltered for nearly 2,000 years, had finally been superseded. 
 
    Half a century of development was needed before Faraday’s discoveries in electricity were translated into full-scale power stations. In 1881 the Godalming power station in Surrey, England, on the banks of the Wey River, created the world’s first public electricity supply. The power source of this most modern technology was a traditional waterwheel. Unfortunately this early plant experienced the problem common to many forms of renewable energy: the flow in the Wey River was unreliable, and the waterwheel was soon replaced by a steam engine. 
 
    From this primitive start, the electric industry grew during the final 20 years of the nineteenth century at a rate seldom if ever exceeded by any technology. The capacity of individual power stations, many of them hydro plants, rose from a few kilowatts to over a megawatt in less than a decade. 
 
1.	The word “harnessed” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	known 
B)	depended on 
C)	recognized 
D)	utilized 
 
2.	In paragraph 1, uncertainty is expressed about all of the following aspects of the early development of waterpower EXCEPT 
A)	when exactly the very first waterpower devices were invented 
B)	where exactly the very first waterpower devices were developed 
C)	whether water was one of the earliest sources of power to be used by humans D) whether the very earliest waterpower devices arose independently 
 
3.	According to paragraph 2, what was true of the waterpower mills built throughout the Roman Empire? 
A)	Most had horizontal-axis wheels. 
B)	Their design was based on mills that had long been used in Scandinavia. 
C)	Their design was more popular beyond the empire’s boundaries than it was within the empire. 
D)	They were more advanced than the mills used in the Middle East at an earlier time. 
 
4.	The phrase “the applications of waterpower” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	the uses to which waterpower was put 
B)	the improvements made to waterpower 
C)	the methods by which waterpower was supplied 
D)	the sources of waterpower available 
 
5.	According to paragraph 4, which of the following was discovered as a result of scientific and technical investigations of waterpower conducted between 1650 and 1800? 
A)	Some types of small waterwheels can produce as much horsepower as the very largest wheels. 
B)	Waterwheels operate more efficiently when water falls away from their blades slowly than when water falls away quickly. 
C)	Waterwheel efficiency can be improved by increasing the amount of kinetic energy water contains as it passes over a waterwheel’s blades. 
D)	Unlike other types of waterwheels, the overshot wheel is capable of producing more than 60 horsepower units of energy. 
 
6.	The word “pessimistic” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	negative 
B)	unlikely 
C)	surprising 
D)	incomplete 
 
7.	The term “by then” in the passage refers to A) by the time steam power entered the scene 
B)	by the year 1800 
C)	by the year 1900 
D)	by the time the waterwheels was becoming obsolete 
 
8.	According to paragraph 5, why did waterpower become more important by 1900? A) Better waterwheel designs improved the efficiency of waterpower. 
B)	Waterpower was needed to operate steam engines. 
C)	Waterpower was used to generate electricity. 
D)	Waterwheels became more efficient than coal-powered engines. 
 
9.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	The growth of the electric-power industry stimulated significant changes in hydro technology and scientific progress in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century. 
B)	The changes in hydro technology that led to the growth of the electric-power industry also led to discoveries and developments in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century. 
C)	Advances in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century and changes in hydro technology were responsible for the growth of the electric-power industry. 
D)	In the nineteenth century, the scientific study of electrotechnology and hydro technology benefited greatly from the growth of the electric-power industry. 
 
10.	The word “unaltered” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	unimproved 
B)	unequaled C) unchanged 
D) unsatisfactory 
 
11.	The discussion of the history of electric power production in paragraph 6 supports which of the following? 
A)	1832 marked the beginning of the industrial production of electric power. 
B)	Turbines using Benoit Fourneyron’s design were eventually used to generate electric power. 
C)	Benoit Fourneyron quickly applied Michael Faraday’s discovery about electric fields to acquire a patent for a new and more efficient waterwheel. 
D)	Practical advances in hydro technology were more important to the development of electric power than were advances in the theoretical understanding of electricity. 
 
12.	According to paragraph 7, what problem did the early power station in the town of Godalming in Surrey, United Kingdom, face in providing electricity? 
A)	The traditional waterwheel it used was not large enough to meet the demand of energy. 
B)	The flow of the River Wey, on which the power station depended, was unreliable. 
C)	The operators of the Godalming power station had little experience with hydro technology. 
D)	The steam engine that turned the waterwheel was faulty and needed to be replaced. 
 
13.	Look at the four squares [?] that indicate where the following sentence could be added to the passage. 
 
Happily, serious studies began to be conducted to help resolve disagreements. 
 
Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Ever since the development of the waterwheel, which occurred no later than 500 
B.C., people have used moving water as a source of power. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The first water-powered machines were probably used to grind corn, and as technology advanced, waterwheels were used as the main source of power in many industries. 
B)	Waterpower mills were probably invented about the same time in the Middle East and Scandinavia and then spread to England by about the second century B.C. 
C)	Almost every large town in England had a waterpower mill allowing England to become the world’s leader in industries that depended on water for their power. 
D)	In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, design improvements in waterwheels led to discoveries of how to increase their efficiency and power output. 
E)	In the late nineteenth century an electric power station in England began using water power from a nearby river, creating a dependable source of power that quickly replaced the steam engine. 
F)	After declining in importance in the early 1800’s, waterpower came back into demand by the end of the century as a means to power electric power plants and water turbines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
????: 1. D  2. C  3. D  4. A  5. B  6. A  7. C  8. C  9. C  10. C 
 
12. B  12. B  13. A  14. A, D, F 
 
 
TPO30  
 
Role of Play in Development 
 
     Play in easier to define with examples than with concepts. In any case, in animals it consists of leaping, running, climbing, throwing, wrestling, and other movements, either alone, with objects, or with other animals. Depending on the species, play may be primarily for social interaction, exercise, or exploration. One of the problems in providing a clear definition of play is that it involves the same behaviors that take place in other circumstances – dominance, predation, competition, and real fighting. Thus, whether play occurs or not depends on the intention of the animal, and intentions are not always clear from behavior alone. 
 
     Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of animals with fairly sophisticated nervous systems, mainly birds and mammals. Play has been studied most extensively in primates and canids (dogs). Exactly why animals play is still a matter debated in the research literature, and the reasons may not be the same for every species that plays. Determining the functions of play is difficult because the functions may be long-term, with beneficial effects not showing up until the animal’s adulthood. 
 
     Play is not without considerable costs to the individual animal. Play is usually very active, involving movement in space and, at times, noisemaking. Therefore, it results in the loss of fuel or energy that might better be used for growth or for building up fat stores in a young animal. Another potential cost of this activity is greater exposure to predators since play is attention-getting behavior. Greater activity also increases the risk of injury in slipping or falling. 
 
     The benefits of play must outweigh the costs, or play would not have evolved, according to Darwin’s theory. Some of the potential benefits relate directly to the healthy development of the brain and nervous system. In one research study, two groups of young rats were raised under different conditions. One group developed in an “enriched” environment, which allowed the rats to interact with other rats, play with toys, and receive maze training. The other group lived in an “impoverished” environment in individual cages in a dimly lit room with little stimulation. At the end of the experiments, the results showed that the actual weight of the brains of the impoverished rats was less than that of those raised in the enriched environment (though they were fed the same diets). Other studies have shown that greater stimulation not only affects the size of the brain but also increases the number of connections between the nerve cells. Thus, active play may provide necessary stimulation to the growth of synaptic connections in the brain, especially the cerebellum, which is responsible for motor functioning and movements. 
 
     Play also stimulates the development of the muscle tissues themselves and may provide the opportunity to practice those movements needed for survival. Prey species, like young deer or goats, for example, typically play by performing sudden flight movements and turns, whereas predator species, such as cats, practice stalking, pouncing, and biting. 
 
     Play allows a young animal to explore its environment and practice skills in comparative safety since the surrounding adults generally do not expect the young to deal with threats or predators. Play can also provide practice in social behaviors needed for courtship and mating. Learning appropriate social behaviors is especially important in species that live in groups, like young monkeys that need to learn to control selfishness and aggression and to understand the give-and-take involved in social groups. They need to learn how to be dominant and submissive because each monkey might have to play either role in the future. Most of these things are learned in the long developmental periods that primates have, during which they engage in countless play experiences with their peers. 
 
     There is a danger, of course, that play may be misinterpreted or not recognized as play by others, potentially leading to aggression. ? This is especially true when play consists of practicing normal aggressive or predatory behaviors. ? Thus, many species have evolved clear signals to delineate playfulness. ? Dogs, for example, will wag their tails, get down on their front legs, and stick their behinds in the air to indicate “what follows is just for play.” ? 
 
 
1.	According to paragraph 1, why is play difficult to define? A) Play must be defined with concepts, not examples. 
B)	Play behavior often looks like nonplay behavior. 
C)	Play often occurs in the presence of animals that are not playing. 
D)	Play occurs independently of an animal’s intentions. 
 
2.	According to paragraph 2, which of the following presents a particular challenge to researchers who study play behavior in animals? 
A)	The delay between play activities and the benefits the animal derives from them 
B)	The difficulty in determining which animal species play and which do not 
C)	The fact that for most animals, there is no clear transition from youth to full adulthood 
D)	The lack of research of the play behavior of animals other than canids and primates 
 
3.	The word “considerable” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	initial 
B)	practical 
C)	eventual 
D)	significant 
 
4.	According to paragraph 3, each of the following is a cost to animals that engage in play EXCEPT 
A)	exposure to predators 
B)	a buildup of fat stores 
C)	a loss of fuel that could be used for growth 
D)	risk of injury from slipping or falling 
 
5.	Why does the author include the comment “though they were fed the same diets”? 
A)	To show why rats living in impoverished environments need less food than those living in enriched environments 
B)	To eliminate the possibility that differences in diet were responsible for observed differences in brain weight 
C)	To emphasize the point that the rats were fed only the amount of food needed to keep them alive 
D)	To suggest that rats fed the same diet have smaller brains than those fed a varied diet 
 
6.	Paragraph 4 supports which of the following statements about an animal’s brain? 
A)	The heavier the brain, the richer the environment in which the animal was raised. 
B)	The younger the animal, the harder it is to develop new connections between nerve cells. 
C)	The larger the cage in which an animal is kept, the heavier the animal’s brain will become. 
D)	The larger an animal’s cerebellum, the larger will be the animal’s nerve cells. 
 
7.	According to paragraph 5, why might play behaviors of prey species be different from those of predator species? 
A)	Unlike predator species, prey species use play to prevent inappropriate social behaviors, such as biting. 
B)	Some prey species are physically incapable of certain types of predator movements. 
C)	The survival of each species type is linked to particular sets of muscular movements. 
D)	Predator species have more opportunities to practice play behaviors than prey species. 
 
8.	The word “comparative” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	relative 
B)	temporary 
C)	sufficient 
D)	complete 
 
9.	Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	Only monkeys that have learned to control their selfish and aggressive behaviors can be involved in social groups. 
B)	Selfish and aggressive animals like monkeys live in groups in order to practice appropriate social behaviors. 
C)	Monkeys and other social animals need to learn behaviors appropriate for their social groups. 
D)	Some monkeys are naturally too selfish and aggressive to understand the give-and-take of social groups, so they learn such important behaviors while young. 
 
10.	What can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the role of adults in play activities of the young? 
A)	Adults help their young learn to become dominant within the social group. 
B)	Young animals learn how to play from the adults within their social group. 
C)	Adults allow the young to engage in play behaviors within a protected, safe environment. 
D)	The long developmental period of some animals allow adults more time to teach their young how to deal with the threats of predators. 
 
11.	The word “potentially” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	undoubtedly 
B)	possibly 
C)	unfortunately 
D)	quickly 
 
12.	According to paragraph 7, how do some animals ensure that other animals understand that they are just playing? 
A)	By playing only with animals who are not predatory 
B)	By avoiding any aspects of the play behavior that are dangerous 
C)	By practicing nonaggressive and nonpredatory behaviors 
D)	By using a set of signals that occurs only in play 
 
13.	Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
With messages such as those, even dogs that are strangers to each other can be playing within a few minutes. 
 
14.	Prose Summary 
 
Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of animals with fairly sophisticated nervous systems, mainly birds and mammals. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	Although play often resembles aggression, flight, or other purposeful activities, researchers do not agree on the reasons for and functions of play. 
B)	The function of play is still debated in the research literature primarily because each animal species uses so few of the many available types of play behavior. 
C)	Although many animals develop physically from play, too many young animals become victims of their natural predators while playing. 
D)	Energy expenditure and security risks are some of the costs to animals of play behavior, but the costs are not so great that they outweigh the long-term benefits of play to the species. 
E)	Animals such as rats, dogs, deer, goats, and monkeys learn how to be both dominant and submissive during play activities so that they will fit in better with their adult social groups. 
F)	As experiments and observations have shown, animals that play at some stage of their development obtain neurological, muscular, or social benefits from the play behaviors. 
The pace of Evolutionary Change 
 
     A heated debate has enlivened recent studies of evolution. Darwin’s original thesis, and the viewpoint supported by evolutionary gradualists, is that species change continuously but slowly and in small increments. Such changes are all but invisible over the short time scale of modern observations, and, it is argued, they are usually obscured by innumerable gaps in the imperfect fossil record. Gradualism, with its stress on the slow pace of change, is a comforting position, repeated over and over again in generations of textbooks. By the early twentieth century, the question about the rate of evolution had been answered in favor of gradualism to most biologists’ satisfaction. 
 
     Sometimes a closed question must be reopened as new evidence or new arguments based on old evidence come to light. In 1972 paleontologists Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge challenged conventional wisdom with an opposing viewpoint, the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis, which posits that species give rise to new species in relatively sudden bursts, without a lengthy transition period. These episodes of rapid evolution are separated by relatively long static spans during which a species may hardly change at all. 
 
     The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis attempts to explain a curious feature of the fossil record – one that has been familiar to paleontologists for more than a century but has usually been ignored. Many species appear to remain unchanged in the fossil record for millions of years – a situation that seems to be at odds with Darwin’s model of continuous change. Intermediate fossil forms, predicted by gradualism, are typically lacking. In most localities a given species of clam or coral persists essentially unchanged throughout a thick formation of rock, only to be replaced suddenly by a new and different species. 
 
     The evolution of North American horses, which was once presented as a classic textbook example of gradual evolution, is now providing equally compelling evidence for punctuated equilibrium. A convincing 50-million-year sequence of modern horse ancestors – each slightly larger, with more complex teeth, a longer face, and a more prominent central toe – seemed to provide strong support for Darwin’s contention that species evolve gradually. But close examination of those fossil deposits now reveals a somewhat different story. Horses evolved in discrete steps, each of which persisted almost unchanged for millions of years and was eventually replaced by a distinctive newer model. The four-toed Eohippus preceded the three-toed Miohippus, for example, but North American fossil evidence suggests a jerky, uneven transition between the two. If evolution had been a continuous, gradual process, one might expect that almost every fossil specimen would be slightly different from every other. 
 
     If it seems difficult to conceive how major changes could occur rapidly, consider this: an alternation of a single gene in flies is enough to turn a normally fly with a single pair of wings into one that has two pairs of wings. 
 
     The question about the rate of evolution must now be turned around: does evolution ever proceed gradually, or does it always occur in short bursts? Detailed field studies of thick rock formations containing fossils provide the best potential tests of the competing theories. 
 
     Occasionally, a sequence of fossil-rich layers of rock permits a comprehensive look at one type of organism over a long period of time. For example, Peter Sheldon’s studies of trilobites, a new extinct marine animal with a segmented body, offer a detailed glimpse into three million years of evolution in one marine environment. In that study, each of eight different trilobites species was observed to undergo a gradual change in the number of segments – typically an increase of one or two segments over the whole time interval. No significant discontinuities were observed, leading Sheldon to conclude that environmental conditions were quite stable during the period he examined. 
 
     ? Similar exhaustive studies are required for many different kinds of organisms from many different periods. ? Most researchers expect to find that both modes of transition from one species to another are at work in evolution. ?Slow, continuous change may be the norm during periods of environmental stability, while rapid evolution of new species occurs during periods of environmental stress. ? But a lot more studies like Sheldon’s are needed before we can say for sure. 
 
1.	The word “innumerable” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	countless 
B)	occasional 
C)	large 
D)	repeated 
    
2.	According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true EXCEPT: 
A)	Darwin saw evolutionary change as happening slowly and gradually. 
B)	Gaps in the fossil record were used to explain why it is difficult to see continuous small changes in the evolution of species. 
C)	Darwin’s evolutionary thesis was rejected because small changes could not be observed in the evolutionary record. 
D)	By the early twentieth century, most biologists believed that gradualism explained evolutionary change. 
 
3.	Which of the following sentences best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? In correct choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information. 
A)	The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis challenged gradualism, which holds that species evolve in relatively sudden bursts of brief duration. 
B)	The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis developed by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge was challenged in 1972. 
C)	In 1972 Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge challenged gradualism by positing that change from one species to another cannot occur without a lengthy transition period. 
D)	The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis, in opposition to gradualism, holds that transitions from one species to another occur in comparatively sudden burst. 
 
4.	According to paragraph 1 and 2, the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis and the gradualism hypothesis differed about 
A)	whether the fossil record is complete 
B)	whether all species undergo change 
C)	whether evolution proceeds at a constant rate 
D)	how many new species occur over long periods of time 
 
5.	According to paragraph 3, the lack of intermediate fossils in the fossil record of some species 
A)	has been extensively studies by paleontologists for over a century 
B)	contradicts the idea that most species have remained unchanged for millions of years 
C)	challenges the view that evolutionary change is gradual 
D)	is most common in the fossil records of clam and coral species 
 
6.	The word “compelling” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	surprising 
B)	persuasive 
C)	controversial D) detailed 
 
7.	Paragraph 4 mentions that North American horses have changed in all of the following ways EXCEPT in 
A)	the number of toes they have 
B)	the length of their faces 
C)	their overall size 
D)	the number of years they live 
 
8.	The word “alteration” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	imperfection 
B)	replacement 
C)	change 
D)	duplication 
 
9.	According to paragraph 7, Peter Sheldon’s studies demonstrated which of the following about trilobites? 
A)	They underwent gradual change over a long time period. 
B)	They experienced a number of discontinuous transitions during their history. 
C)	They remained unchanged during a long period of environmental stability. 
D)	They evolved in ways that cannot be accounted for by either of the two competing theories. 
 
10.	The word “Occasionally” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	Undoubtedly 
B)	Basically 
C)	Once in a while 
D)	To some extent 
 
11.	The main purpose of paragraph 7 is to A) describe one test of the competing theories 
B)	provide an example of punctuated equilibrium 
C)	describe how segmented animals evidence both competing theories D) explain why trilobites became extinct 
 
12.	Where the sentence best fit? 
 
They believe that environmental conditions may play a crucial role in determining which of the two modes will be in operation over a given period. 
 
13.	Select from the seven phrases below the phrases that correctly characterize punctuated equilibrium and the phrases that correctly characterize gradualism. Two of the phrases will NOT be used. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	States that new species emerge from existing species during relatively brief periods of time 
B)	Was first formulated by Charles Darwin 
C)	Explains why North American horses have become smaller over time 
D)	States that new species evolve slowly and continuously from existing species 
E)	Explains the lack of intermediate fossil forms in the fossil record of many species 
F)	States that a species will not change unless its environment changes 
G)	Is associated with periods of environmental stability 
 
 
Gradualism 
 
?	
?	
?	
 
Punctuated Equilibrium 
 
?	
?	
 
       The Invention of the Mechanical Clock 
 
     In Europe, before the introduction of the mechanical clock, people told time by sun (using, for example, shadow sticks or sun dials) and water clocks. Sun clocks worked, of course, only on clear days, water clocks misbehaved when the temperature fell toward freezing, to say nothing of long-run drift as the result of sedimentation and clogging. Both these devices worked well in sunny climates, but in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time, while temperatures vary not only seasonally but from day to night. 
 
     Medieval Europe gave new importance to reliable time. The Catholic Church had its seven daily prayers, one of which was at night, requiring an alarm arrangement to waken monks before dawn. And then the new cities and towns, squeezed by their walls, had to know and order time in order to organize collective activity and ration space. They set a time to go to work, to open the market, to close the market, to leave work, and finally a time to put out fires and to go to sleep. All this was compatible with older devices so long as there was only one authoritative timekeeper, but with urban growth and the multiplication of time signals, discrepancy brought discord and strife. Society needed a more dependable instrument of time measurement and found it in the mechanical clock. 
 
     We do not know who invented this machine, or where. It seems to have appeared in Italy and England (perhaps simultaneous invention) between 1275 and 1300. Once known, it spread rapidly, driving out water clocks but not solar dials, which were needed to check the new machines against the timekeeper of last resort. These early versions were rudimentary, inaccurate, and prone to breakdown. 
 
     Ironically, the new machine tended to undermine Catholic Church 
authority. Although church ritual had sustained an interest in timekeeping throughout the centuries of urban collapse that followed the fall of Rome, church time was nature’s time. ? Day and night were divided into the same number of parts, so that except at the equinoxes, day and night hours were unequal, and then of course the length of these hours varied with the seasons. ?But the mechanical clock kept equal hours, and this implied a new time reckoning. ? The Catholic Church resisted, not coming over to the new hours for about a century. ? From the start, however, the towns and cities took equal hours as their standard, and the public clocks installed in town halls and market squares became the very symbol of a new, secular municipal authority. Every town wanted one, conquerors sized them as especially precious spoils of war, tourists came to see and hear these machines the way they made pilgrimages to scared relics. 
 
     The clock was the greatest achievement of medieval mechanical ingenuity. Its general accuracy could be checked against easily observed phenomena, like the rising and setting of the sun. The result was relentless pressure to improve technique and design. At every stage, clockmakers led the way to accuracy and precision, they became masters of miniaturization, detectors and correctors of error, searchers for new and better. They were thus the pioneers of mechanical engineering and served as examples and teachers to other branches of engineering. 
 
     The clock brought order and control, both collective and personal. Its public display and private possession laid the basis for temporal autonomy, people could now coordinate comings and goings without dictation from above. The clock provided the punctuation marks for group activity, while enabling individuals to order their own work (and that of others) so as to enhance productivity. Indeed, the very notion of productivity is a by-product of the clock: once one can relate performance to uniform time unites, work is never the same. One moves from the task-oriented time consciousness of the peasant (working one job after another, as time and light permit) and the time-filling busyness of the domestic servant (who always had something to do) to an effort to maximize product per unit of time. 
 
1.	Why does the author provide the information on that “in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time, while temperatures vary not only seasonally but from day to night”? 
A)	To emphasize the variety of environments in which people used sun and water clocks to tell time 
B)	To illustrate the disadvantages of sun and water clocks 
C)	To provide and example of an area where water clocks have an advantage over sun clocks 
D)	To counter the claim that sun and water clocks were used all over Europe 
 
2.	According to paragraph 2, all of the following are examples of the importance of timekeeping to medieval European society EXCEPT 
A)	the need of different towns to coordinate timekeeping with each other 
B)	the setting of specific times for the opening and closing of markets 
C)	the setting of specific times for the start and finish of the working day 
D)	the regulation of the performance of daily church rituals 
 
3.	The word “authoritative” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	actual 
B)	important 
C)	official 
D)	effective 
 
4.	The author uses the phrase “the timekeeper of last resort” to refer to 
A)	water clocks 
B)	the sun 
C)	mechanical clocks 
D)	the church 
 
5.	The word “rudimentary” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	rare 
B)	small 
C)	impractical 
D)	basic 
 
6.	According to paragraph 4, how did the Catholic Church react to the introduction of mechanical clocks? 
A)	It used mechanical clocks through the period of urban collapse. 
B)	It used clocks to better understand natural phenomena, like equinoxes. 
C)	It tried to preserve its own method of keeping time, which was different from mechanical-clock time. 
D)	It used mechanical clocks to challenge secular, town authorities. 
 
7.	The word “installed” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	required 
B)	expected by the majority of people 
C)	standardized 
D)	put in place 
 
8.	It can be inferred from paragraph 5 that medieval clockmakers 
A)	were able to continually make improvements in the accuracy of mechanical clocks 
B)	were sometimes not well respected by other engineers 
C)	sometimes make claims about the accuracy of mechanical clocks that were not true 
D)	rarely shared their expertise with other engineers 
 
9.	Paragraph 5 answers which of the following questions about mechanical clocks? 
A)	How did early mechanical clocks work? 
B)	Why did the design of mechanical clocks affect engineering in general? 
C)	How ere mechanical clocks made? 
D)	What influenced the design of the first mechanical clock? 
 
10.	The word “pioneers” in the passage is closest in meaning to 
A)	leaders 
B)	opponents 
C)	employees 
D)	guardians 
 
11.	According to paragraph 6, how did the mechanical clock affect labor? A) It encouraged workers to do more time-filling busywork. 
B)	It enabled workers to be more task oriented. 
C)	It pushed workers to work more hours every day. 
D)	It led to a focus on productivity. 
 
12.	Where does the sentence best fit? 
 
The division of time no longer reflected the organization of religious ritual. 
 
13.	Prose Summary 
 
The introduction of the mechanical clock caused important changes to the society of medieval Europe. 
 
Answer Choices: 
 
A)	The increasing complexity of social and economic activity in medieval Europe led to the need for a more dependable means of keeping time than sun and water clocks provided. 
B)	Because they were unreliable even in sunny climates, sun clocks and water clocks were rarely used in Europe, even before the invention of the mechanical clock. 
C)	Before the mechanical clock, every city wanted a large number of timekeepers because more timekeepers allowed for better organization of collective activities. 
D)	Soon after the invention of the mechanical clock, sun and water clocks became obsolete because mechanical clocks were far more accurate. 
E)	Although society in general was quick to adopt the mechanical clock, the Catholic Church resisted it because it challenged the authority of the church. 
F)	Clockmakers introduced precision engineering, and their clocks gave individuals and groups more control over the organization of their activities. 
